HOMER

THE ODYSSEY

TRANSLATED BY ROBERT FITZGERALD 



BOOK 1

Sing in me, Muse, and through me tell the story 
of that man skilled in all ways of contending, 
the wanderer, harried for years on end, 
after he plundered the stronghold 
on the proud height of Troy. 
He saw the townlands 
and learned the minds of many distant men, 
and weathered many bitter nights and days 
in his deep heart at sea, while he fought only 
to save his life, to bring his shipmates home. 
But not by will nor valor could he save them, 
for their own recklessness destroyed them all— 
children and fools, they killed and feasted on 
the cattle of Lord Hélios, the Sun, 
and he who moves all day through heaven 
took from their eyes the dawn of their return. 
Of these adventures, Muse, daughter of Zeus, 
tell us in our time, lift the great song again. 
Begin when all the rest who left behind them 
headlong death in battle or at sea 
had long ago returned, while he alone still hungered 
for home and wife. Her ladyship Kalypso 
clung to him in her sea-hollowed caves— 
a nymph, immortal and most beautiful, 
who craved him for her own. 
And when long years and seasons 
wheeling brought around that point of time 
ordained for him to make his passage homeward, 
trials and dangers, even so, attended him 
even in Ithaka, near those he loved. 
Yet all the gods had pitied Lord Odysseus, 
all but Poseidon, raging cold and rough 
against the brave king till he came ashore 
at last on his own land. 
But now that god 
had gone far off among the sunburnt races, 
most remote of men, at earth’s two verges, 
in sunset lands and lands of the rising sun, 
to be regaled by smoke of thighbones burning, 
haunches of rams and bulls, a hundred fold. 
He lingered delighted at the banquet side. 
In the bright hall of Zeus upon Olympos 
the other gods were all at home, and Zeus, 
the father of gods and men, made conversation. 
For he had meditated on Aigisthos, dead 
by the hand of Agamémnon’s son, Orestés, 
and spoke his thought aloud before them all: 
“My word, how mortals take the gods to task! 
All their afflictions come from us, we hear. 
And what of their own failings? Greed and folly 
double the suffering in the lot of man. 
See how Aigisthos, for his double portion, 
stole Agamémnon’s wife and killed the soldier 
on his homecoming day. And yet Aigisthos 
knew that his own doom lay in this. We gods 
had warned him, sent down Hermés Argeiphontés, 
our most observant courier, to say: 
‘Don’t kill the man, don’t touch his wife, 
or face a reckoning with Orestés 
the day he comes of age and wants his patrimony.’ 
Friendly advice—but would Aigisthos take it? 
Now he has paid the reckoning in full.” 
The grey-eyed goddess Athena replied to Zeus: 
“O Majesty, O Father of us all, 
that man is in the dust indeed, and justly. 
So perish all who do what he had done. 
But my own heart is broken for Odysseus, 
the master mind of war, so long a castaway 
upon an island in the running sea; 
a wooded island, in the sea’s middle, 
and there’s a goddess in the place, the daughter 
of one whose baleful mind knows all the deeps 
of the blue sea—Atlas, who holds the columns 
that bear from land the great thrust of the sky. 
His daughter will not let Odysseus go, 
poor mournful man; she keeps on coaxing him 
with her beguiling talk, to turn his mind 
from Ithaka. But such desire is in him 
merely to see the hearthsmoke leaping upward 
from his own island, that he longs to die. 
Are you not moved by this, Lord of Olympos? 
Had you no pleasure from Odysseus’ offerings 
beside the Argive ships, on Troy’s wide seaboard? 
O Zeus, what do you hold against him now?” 
To this the summoner of cloud replied: 
“My child, what strange remarks you let escape you. 
Could I forget that kingly man, Odysseus? 
There is no mortal half so wise; no mortal 
gave so much to the lords of open sky. 
Only the god who laps the land in water, 
Poseidon, bears the fighter an old grudge 
since he poked out the eye of Polyphemos, 
brawniest of the Kyklopes. Who bore 
that giant lout? Thodsa, daughter of Phorkys, 
an offshore sea lord: for this nymph had lain 
with Lord Poseidon in her hollow caves. 
Naturally, the god, after the blinding— 
mind you, he does not kill the man; 
he only buffets him away from home. 
But come now, we are all at leisure here, 
let us take up this matter of his return, 
that he may sail. Poseidon must relent 
for being quarrelsome will get him nowhere, 
one god, flouting the will of all the gods.” 
The grey-eyed goddess Athena answered him: 
“O Majesty, O Father of us all, 
if it now please the blissful gods 
that wise Odysseus reach his home again, 
let the Wayfinder, Hermés, cross the sea 
to the island of Ogygia; let him tell 
our fixed intent to the nymph with pretty braids, 
and let the steadfast man depart for home. 
For my part, I shall visit Ithaka 
to put more courage in the son, and rouse him 
to call an assembly of the islanders, 
Akhaian gentlemen with flowing hair. 
He must warn off that wolf pack of the suitors 
who prey upon his flocks and dusky cattle. 
Pll send him to the mainland then, to Sparta 
by the sand beach of Pylos; let him find 
news of his dear father where he may 
and win his own renown about the world.” 
She bent to tie her beautiful sandals on, 
ambrosial, golden, that carry her over water 
or over endless land on the wings of the wind, 
and took the great haft of her spear in hand— 
that bronzeshod spear this child of Power can use 
to break in wrath long battle lines of fighters. 
Flashing down from Olympos’ height she went 
to stand in Ithaka, before the Manor, 
just at the doorsill of the court. She seemed 
a family friend, the Taphian captain, Mentes, 
waiting, with a light hand on her spear. 
Before her eyes she found the lusty suitors 
casting dice inside the gate, at ease 
on hides of oxen—oxen they had killed. 
Their own retainers made a busy sight 
with houseboys mixing bowls of water and wine, 
or sopping water up in sponges, wiping 
tables to be placed about in hall, 
or butchering whole carcasses for roasting. 
Long before anyone else, the prince Telémakhos 
now caught sight of Athena—for he, too, 
was sitting there unhappy among the suitors, 
a boy, daydreaming. What if his great father 
came from the unknown world and drove these men 
like dead leaves through the place, recovering 
honor and lordship in his own domains? 
Then he who dreamed in the crowd gazed out at Athena. 
Straight to the door he came, irked with himself 
to think a visitor had been kept there waiting, 
and took her right hand, grasping with his left 
her tall bronze-bladed spear. Then he said warmly: 
“Greetings, stranger! Welcome to our feast. 
There will be time to tell your errand later.” 
He led the way, and Pallas Athena followed 
into the lofty hall. The boy reached up 
and thrust her spear high in a polished rack 
against a pillar where tough spear on spear 
of the old soldier, his father, stood in order. 
Then, shaking out a splendid coverlet, 
he seated her on a throne with footrest—all 
finely carved—and drew his painted armchair 
near her, at a distance from the rest. 
To be amid the din, the suitors’ riot, 
would ruin his guest’s appetite, he thought, 
and he wished privacy to ask for news 
about his father, gone for years. 
A maid 
brought them a silver finger bowl and filled it 
out of a beautiful spouting golden jug, 
then drew a polished table to their side. 
The larder mistress with her tray came by 
and served them generously. A carver lifted 
cuts of each roast meat to put on trenchers 
before the two. He gave them cups of gold, 
and these the steward as he went his rounds 
filled and filled again. 
Now came the suitors, 
young bloods trooping in to their own seats 
on thrones or easy chairs. Attendants poured 
water over their fingers, while the maids 
piled baskets full of brown loaves near at hand, 
and houseboys brimmed the bowls with wine. 
Now they laid hands upon the ready feast 
and thought of nothing more. Not till desire 
for food and drink had left them were they mindful 
of dance and song, that are the grace of feasting. 
A herald gave a shapely cithern harp 
to Phémios, whom they compelled to sing— 
and what a storm he plucked upon the strings 
for prelude! High and clear the song arose. 
Telémakhos now spoke to grey-eyed Athena, 
his head bent close, so no one else might hear: 
“Dear guest, will this offend you, if I speak? 
It is easy for these men to like these things, 
harping and song; they have an easy life, 
scot free, eating the livestock of another— 
a man whose bones are rotting somewhere now, 
white in the rain on dark earth where they lie, 
or tumbling in the groundswell of the sea. 
If he returned, if these men ever saw him, 
faster legs they’d pray for, to a man, 
and not more wealth in handsome robes or gold. 
But he is lost; he came to grief and perished, 
and there’s no help for us in someone’s hoping 
he still may come; that sun has long gone down. 
But tell me now, and put it for me clearly— 
who are you? Where do you come from? Where’s your home 
and family? What kind of ship is yours, 
and what course brought you here? Who are your sailors? 
I don’t suppose you walked here on the sea. 
Another thing—this too I ought to know— 
is Ithaka new to you, or were you ever 
a guest here in the old days? Far and near 
friends knew this house; for he whose home it was 
had much acquaintance in the world.” 
To this 
the grey-eyed goddess answered: 
“As you ask, 
I can account most clearly for myself. 
Mentés I’m called, son of the veteran 
Ankhialos; I rule seafaring Taphos. 
I came by ship, with a ship’s company, 
sailing the winedark sea for ports of call 
on alien shores—to Témesé, for copper, 
bringing bright bars of iron in exchange. 
My ship is moored on a wild strip of coast 
in Reithron Bight, under the wooded mountain. 
Years back, my family and yours were friends, 
as Lord Laértés knows; ask when you see him. 
I hear the old man comes to town no longer, 
stays up country, ailing, with only one 
old woman to prepare his meat and drink 
when pain and stiffness take him in the legs 
from working on his terraced plot, his vineyard. 
As for my sailing here— 
the tale was that your father had come home, 
therefore I came. I see the gods delay him. 
But never in this world is Odysseus dead— 
only detained somewhere on the wide sea, 
upon some island, with wild islanders; 
savages, they must be, to hold him captive. 
Well, I will forecast for you, as the gods 
put the strong feeling in me—I see it all, 
and I’m no prophet, no adept in bird-signs. 
He will not, now, be long away from Ithaka, 
his father’s dear land; though he be in chains 
he’ll scheme a way to come; he can do anything. 
But tell me this now, make it clear to me: 
You must be, by your looks, Odysseus’ boy? 
The way your head is shaped, the fine eyes—yes, 
how like him! We took meals like this together 
many a time, before he sailed for Troy 
with all the lords of Argos in the ships. 
I have not seen him since, nor has he seen me.” 
And thoughtfully Telémakhos replied: 
“Friend, let me put it in the plainest way. 
My mother says I am his son; I know not 
surely. Who has known his own engendering? 
I wish at least I had some happy man 
as father, growing old in his own house— 
but unknown death and silence are the fate 
of him that, since you ask, they call my father.” 
Then grey-eyed Athena said: 
“The gods decreed 
no lack of honor in this generation: 
such is the son Penelope bore in you. 
But tell me now, and make this clear to me: 
what gathering, what feast is this? Why here? 
A wedding? Revel? At the expense of all? 
Not that, I think. How arrogant they seem, 
these gluttons, making free here in your house! 
A sensible man would blush to be among them.” 
To this Telémakhos answered: 
“Friend, now that you ask about these matters, 
our house was always princely, a great house, 
as long as he of whom we speak remained here. 
But evil days the gods have brought upon it, 
making him vanish, as they have, so strangely. 
Were his death known, I could not feel such pain— 
if he had died of wounds in Trojan country 
or in the arms of friends, after the war. 
They would have made a tomb for him, the Akhaians, 
and I should have all honor as his son. 
Instead, the whirlwinds got him, and no glory. 
He’s gone, no sign, no word of him; and I inherit 
trouble and tears—and not for him alone, 
the gods have laid such other burdens on me. 
For now the lords of the islands, 
Doulikhion and Samé, wooded Zakynthos, 
and rocky Ithaka’s young lords as well, 
are here courting my mother; and they use 
our house as if it were a house to plunder. 
Spurn them she dare not, though she hates that marriage, 
nor can she bring herself to choose among them. 
Meanwhile they eat their way through all we have, 
and when they will, they can demolish me.” 
Pallas Athena was disturbed, and said: 
“Ah, bitterly you need Odysseus, then! 
High time he came back to engage these upstarts. 
I wish we saw him standing helmeted 
there in the doorway, holding shield and spear, 
looking the way he did when I first knew him. 
That was at our house, where he drank and feasted 
after he left Ephyra, homeward bound 
from a visit to the son of Mérmeris, Ilos. 
He took his fast ship down the gulf that time 
for a fatal drug to dip his arrows in 
and poison the bronze points; but young Ilos 
turned him away, fearing the gods’ wrath. 
My father gave it, for he loved him well. 
I wish these men could meet the man of those days! 
They’d know their fortune quickly: a cold bed. 
Aye! but it lies upon the gods’ great knees 
whether he can return and force a reckoning 
in his own house, or not. 
If I were you, 
I should take steps to make these men disperse. 
Listen, now, and attend to what I say: 
at daybreak call the islanders to assembly, 
and speak your will, and call the gods to witness: 
the suitors must go scattering to their homes. 
Then here’s a course for you, if you agree: 
get a sound craft afloat with twenty oars 
and go abroad for news of your lost father— 
perhaps a traveller’s tale, or rumored fame 
issued from Zeus abroad in the world of men. 
Talk to that noble sage at Pylos, Nestor, 
then go to Meneláos, the red-haired king 
at Sparta, last man home of all the Akhaians. 
If you should learn your father is alive 
and coming home, you could hold out a year. 
Or if you learn that he is dead and gone, 
then you can come back to your own dear country 
and raise a mound for him, and burn his gear, 
with all the funeral honors due the man, 
and give your mother to another husband. 
When you have done all this, or seen it done, 
it will be time to ponder 
concerning these contenders in your house— 
how you should kill them, outright or by guile. 
You need not bear this insolence of theirs, 
you are a child no longer. Have you heard 
what glory young Orestés won 
when he cut down that two-faced man, Aigisthos, 
for killing his illustrious father? 
Dear friend, you are tall and well set-up, I see; 
be brave—you, too—and men in times to come 
will speak of you respectfully. 
Now I must join my ship; 
my crew will grumble if I keep them waiting. 
Look to yourself; remember what I told you.” 
Telémakhos replied: 
“Friend, you have done me 
kindness, like a father to his son, 
and I shall not forget your counsel ever. 
You must get back to sea, I know, but come 
take a hot bath, and rest; accept a gift 
to make your heart lift up when you embark— 
some precious thing, and beautiful, from me, 
a keepsake, such as dear friends give their friends.” 
But the grey-eyed goddess Athena answered him: 
“Do not delay me, for I love the sea ways. 
As for the gift your heart is set on giving, 
let me accept it on my passage home, 
and you shall have a choice gift in exchange.” 
With this Athena left him 
as a bird rustles upward, off and gone. 
But as she went she put new spirit in him, 
a new dream of his father, clearer now, 
so that he marvelled to himself 
divining that a god had been his guest. 
Then godlike in his turn he joined the suitors. 
The famous minstrel still sang on before them, 
and they sat still and listened, while he sang 
that bitter song, the Homecoming of Akhaians— 
how by Athena’s will they fared from Troy; 
and in her high room careful Penélopé, 
Ikarios’ daughter, heeded the holy song. 
She came, then, down the long stairs of her house, 
this beautiful lady, with two maids in train 
attending her as she approached the suitors; 
and near a pillar of the roof she paused, 
her shining veil drawn over across her cheeks, 
the two girls close to her and still, 
and through her tears spoke to the noble minstrel: 
“Phémios, other spells you know, high deeds 
of gods and heroes, as the poets tell them; 
let these men hear some other; let them sit 
silent and drink their wine. But sing no more 
this bitter tale that wears my heart away. 
It opens in me again the wound of longing 
for one incomparable, ever in my mind— 
his fame all Hellas knows, and midland Argos.” 
But Telémakhos intervened and said to her: 
“Mother, why do you grudge our own dear minstrel 
joy of song, wherever his thought may lead? 
Poets are not to blame, but Zeus who gives 
what fate he pleases to adventurous men. 
Here is no reason for reproof: to sing 
the news of the Danaans! Men like best 
a song that rings like morning on the ear. 
But you must nerve yourself and try to listen. 
Odysseus was not the only one at Troy 
never to know the day of his homecoming. 
Others, how many others, lost their lives!” 
The lady gazed in wonder and withdrew, 
her son’s clear wisdom echoing in her mind. 
But when she had mounted to her rooms again 
with her two handmaids, then she fell to weeping 
for Odysseus, her husband. Grey-eyed Athena 
presently cast a sweet sleep on her eyes. 
Meanwhile the din grew loud in the shadowy hall 
as every suitor swore to lie beside her, 
but Telémakhos turned now and spoke to them: 
“You suitors of my mother! Insolent men, 
now we have dined, let us have entertainment 
and no more shouting. There can be no pleasure 
so fair as giving heed to a great minstrel 
like ours, whose voice itself is pure delight. 
At daybreak we shall sit down in assembly 
and I shall tell you—take it as you will— 
you are to leave this hall. Go feasting elsewhere, 
consume your own stores. Turn and turn about, 
use one another’s houses. If you choose 
to slaughter one man’s livestock and pay nothing, 
this is rapine; and by the eternal gods 
I beg Zeus you shall get what you deserve: 
a slaughter here, and nothing paid for it!” 
By now their teeth seemed fixed in their under-lips, 
Telémakhos’ bold speaking stunned them so. 
Antinoés, Eupeithes’ son, made answer: 
“Telémakhos, no doubt the gods themselves 
are teaching you this high and mighty manner. 
Zeus forbid you should be king in Ithaka, 
though you are eligible as your father’s son.” 
Telémakhos kept his head and answered him: 
“Antinoés, you may not like my answer, 
but I would happily be king, if Zeus 
conferred the prize. Or do you think it wretched? 
I shouldn’t call it bad at all. A king 
will be respected, and his house will flourish. 
But there are eligible men enough, 
heaven knows, on the island, young and old, 
and one of them perhaps may come to power 
after the death of King Odysseus. 
All I insist on is that I rule our house 
and rule the slaves my father won for me.” 
Eurymakhos, Pélybos’ son, replied: 
“Telémakhos, it is on the gods’ great knees 
who will be king in sea-girt Ithaka. 
But keep your property, and rule your house, 
and let no man, against your will, make havoc 
of your possessions, while there’s life on Ithaka. 
But now, my brave young friend, 
a question or two about the stranger. 
Where did your guest come from? Of what country? 
Where does he say his home is, and his family? 
Has he some message of your father’s coming, 
or business of his own, asking a favor? 
He left so quickly that one hadn’t time 
to meet him, but he seemed a gentleman.” 
Telémakhos made answer, cool enough: 
“Eurymakhos, there’s no hope for my father. 
I would not trust a message, if one came, 
nor any forecaster my mother invites 
to tell by divination of time to come. 
My guest, however, was a family friend, 
Mentés, son of Ankhialos. 
He rules the Taphian people of the sea.” 
So said Telémakhos, though in his heart 
he knew his visitor had been immortal. 
But now the suitors turned to play again 
with dance and haunting song. They stayed till nightfall, 
indeed black night came on them at their pleasure, 
and half asleep they left, each for his home. 
Telémakhos’ bedroom was above the court, 
a kind of tower, with a view all round; 
here he retired to ponder in the silence, 
while carrying brands of pine alight beside him 
Eurykleia went padding, sage and old. 
Her father had been Ops, Peisénor’s son, 
and she had been a purchase of Laértés 
when she was still a blossoming girl. He gave 
the price of twenty oxen for her, kept her 
as kindly in his house as his own wife, 
though, for the sake of peace, he never touched her. 
No servant loved Telémakhos as she did, 
she who had nursed him in his infancy. 
So now she held the light, as he swung open 
the door of his neat freshly painted chamber. 
There he sat down, pulling his tunic off, 
and tossed it into the wise old woman’s hands. 
She folded it and smoothed it, and then hung it 
beside the inlaid bed upon a bar; 
then, drawing the door shut by its silver handle 
she slid the catch in place and went away. 
And all night long, wrapped in the finest fleece, 
he took in thought the course Athena gave him. 


BOOK 2

When primal Dawn spread on the eastern sky 
her fingers of pink light, Odysseus’ true son 
stood up, drew on his tunic and his mantle, 
slung on a sword-belt and a new-edged sword, 
tied his smooth feet into good rawhide sandals, 
and left his room, a god’s brilliance upon him. 
He found the criers with clarion voices and told them 
to muster the unshorn Akhaians in full assembly. 
The call sang out, and the men came streaming in; 
and when they filled the assembly ground, he entered, 
spear in hand, with two quick hounds at heel; 
Athena lavished on him a sunlit grace 
that held the eye of the multitude. Old men 
made way for him as he took his father’s chair. 
Now Lord Aigyptios, bent down and sage with years, 
opened the assembly. This man’s son 
had served under the great Odysseus, gone 
in the decked ships with him to the wild horse country 
of Troy—a spearman, Antiphos by name. 
The ravenous Kyklops in the cave destroyed him 
last in his feast of men. Three other sons 
the old man had, and one, Eurynomos, 
went with the suitors; two farmed for their father; 
but even so the old man pined, remembering 
the absent one, and a tear welled up as he spoke: 
“Hear me, Ithakans! Hear what I have to say. 
No meeting has been held here since our king, 
Odysseus, left port in the decked ships. 
Who finds occasion for assembly, now? 
one of the young men? one of the older lot? 
Has he had word our fighters are returning— 
news to report if he got wind of it— 
or is it something else, touching the realm? 
The man has vigor, I should say; more power to him. 
Whatever he desires, may Zeus fulfill it.” 
The old man’s words delighted the son of Odysseus, 
who kept his chair no longer but stood up, 
eager to speak, in the midst of all the men. 
The crier, Peisénor, master of debate, 
brought him the staff and placed it in his hand; 
then the boy touched the old man’s shoulder, and said: 
“No need to wonder any more, Sir, 
whc called this session. The distress is mine. 
As to our troops returning, I have no news— 
news to report if I got wind of it— 
nor have I public business to propose; 
only my need, and the trouble of my house— 
the troubles. 
My distinguished father is lost, 
who ruled among you once, mild as a father, 
and there is now this greater evil still: 
my home and all I have are being ruined. 
Mother wanted no suitors, but like a pack 
they came—sons of the best men here among them— 
lads with no stomach for an introduction 
to Ikarios, her father across the sea; 
he would require a wedding gift, and give her 
to someone who found favor in her eyes. 
No; these men spend their days around our house 
killing our beeves and sheep and fatted goats, 
carousing, soaking up our good dark wine, 
not caring what they do. They squander everything. 
We have no strong Odysseus to defend us, 
and as to putting up a fight ourselves— 
wed only show our incompetence in arms. 
Expel them, yes, if I only had the power; 
the whole thing’s out of hand, insufferable. 
My house is being plundered: is this courtesy? 
Where is your indignation? Where is your shame? 
Think of the talk in the islands all around us, 
and fear the wrath of the gods, 
or they may turn, and send you some devilry. 
Friends, by Olympian Zeus and holy Justice 
that holds men in assembly and sets them free, 
make an end of this! Let me lament in peace 
my private loss. Or did my father, Odysseus, 
ever do injury to the armed Akhaians? 
Is this your way of taking it out on me, 
giving free rein to these young men? 
I might as well—might better—see my treasure 
and livestock taken over by you all; 
then, if you fed on them, I’d have some remedy, 
and when we met, in public, in the town, 
Pd press my claim; you might make restitution. 
This way you hurt me when my hands are tied.” 
And in hot anger now he threw the staff to the ground, 
his eyes grown bright with tears. A wave of sympathy 
ran through the crowd, all hushed; and no one there 
had the audacity to answer harshly 
except Antinods, who said: 
“What high and mighty 
talk, Telémakhos! No holding you! 
You want to shame us, and humiliate us, 
but you should know the suitors are not to blame— 
it is your own dear, incomparably cunning mother. 
For three years now—and it will soon be four— 
she has been breaking the hearts of the Akhaians, 
holding out hope to all, and sending promises 
to each man privately—but thinking otherwise. 
Here is an instance of her trickery: 
she had her great loom standing in the hall 
and the fine warp of some vast fabric on it; 
we were attending her, and she said to us: 
‘Young men, my suitors, now my lord is dead, 
let me finish my weaving before I marry, 
or else my thread will have been spun in vain. 
It is a shroud I weave for Lord Laértés, 
when cold death comes to lay him on his bier. 
The country wives would hold me in dishonor 
if he, with all his fortune, lay unshrouded.’ 
We have men’s hearts; she touched them; we agreed. 
So every day she wove on the great loom— 
but every night by torchlight she unwove it; 
and so for three years she deceived the Akhaians. 
But when the seasons brought the fourth around, 
one of her maids, who knew the secret, told us; 
we found her unraveling the splendid shroud. 
She had to finish then, although she hated it. 
Now here is the suitors’ answer— 
you and all the Akhaians, mark it well: 
dismiss your mother from the house, or make her marry 
the man her father names and she prefers. 
Does she intend to keep us dangling forever? 
She may rely too long on Athena’s gifts— 
talent in handicraft and a clever mind; 
so cunning—history cannot show the like 
among the ringleted ladies of Akhaia, 
Mykene with her coronet, Alkmene, Tyro. 
Wits like Penelope’s never were before, 
but this time—well, she made poor use of them. 
For here are suitors eating up your property 
as long as she holds out—a plan some god 
put in her mind. She makes a name for herself, 
but you can feel the loss it means for you. 
Our own affairs can wait; we’ll never go anywhere else, 
until she takes an Akhaian to her liking.” 
But clear-headed Telémakhos replied: 
“Antinoos, can I banish against her will 
the mother who bore me and took care of me? 
My father is either dead or far away, 
but dearly I should pay for this 
at Ikarios’ hands, if ever I sent her back. 
The powers of darkness would requite it, too, 
my mother’s parting curse would call hell’s furies 
to punish me, along with the scorn of men. 
No: I can never give the word for this. 
But if your hearts are capable of shame, 
leave my great hall, and take your dinner elsewhere, 
consume your own stores. Turn and turn about, 
use one another’s houses. If you choose 
to slaughter one man’s livestock and pay nothing, 
this is rapine; and by the eternal gods 
I beg Zeus you shall get what you deserve: 
a slaughter here, and nothing paid for it!” 
Now Zeus who views the wide world sent a sign to him, 
launching a pair of eagles from a mountain crest 
in gliding flight down the soft blowing wind, 
wing-tip to wing-tip quivering taut, companions, 
till high above the assembly of many voices 
they wheeled, their dense wings beating, and in havoc 
dropped on the heads of the crowd—a deathly omen— 
wielding their talons, tearing cheeks and throats; 
then veered away on the right hand through the city. 
Astonished, gaping after the birds, the men 
felt their hearts flood, foreboding things to come. 
And now they heard the old lord Halithersés, 
son of Mastor, keenest among the old 
at reading birdflight into accurate speech; 
in his anxiety for them, he rose and said: 
“Hear me, Ithakans! Hear what I have to say, 
and may I hope to open the suitors’ eyes 
to the black wave towering over them. Odysseus 
will not be absent from his family long: 
he is already near, carrying in him 
a bloody doom for all these men, and sorrow 
for many more on our high seamark, Ithaka. 
Let us think how to stop it; let the suitors 
drop their suit; they had better, without delay. 
I am old enough to know a sign when I see one, 
and I say all has come to pass for Odysseus 
as I foretold when the Argives massed on Troy, 
and he, the great tactician, joined the rest. 
My forecast was that after nineteen years, 
many blows weathered, all his shipmates lost, 
himself unrecognized by anyone, 
he would come home. I see this all fulfilled.” 
But Pdélybos’ son, Eurymakhos, retorted: 
“Old man, go tell the omens for your children 
at home, and try to keep them out of trouble. 
I am more fit to interpret this than you are. 
Bird life aplenty is found in the sunny air, 
not all of it significant. As for Odysseus, 
he perished far from home. You should have perished with 
him— 
then we’d be spared this nonsense in assembly, 
as good as telling Telémakhos to rage on; 
do you think you can gamble on a gift from him? 
Here is what I foretell, and it’s quite certain: 
if you, with what you know of ancient lore, 
encourage bitterness in this young man, 
it means, for him, only the more frustration— 
he can do nothing whatever with two eagles— 
and as for you, old man, we'll fix a penalty 
that you will groan to pay. 
Before the whole assembly I advise Telémakhos 
to send his mother to her father’s house; 
let them arrange her wedding there, and fix 
a portion suitable for a valued daughter. 
Until he does this, courtship is our business, 
vexing though it may be; we fear no one, 
certainly not Telémakhos, with his talk; 
and we care nothing for your divining, uncle, 
useless talk; you win more hatred by it. 
We'll share his meat, no thanks or fee to him, 
as long as she delays and maddens us. 
It is a long, long time we have been waiting 
in rivalry for this beauty. We could have gone 
elsewhere and found ourselves very decent wives.” 
Clear-headed Telémakhos replied to this: 
“Eurymakhos, and noble suitors all, 
I am finished with appeals and argument. 
The gods know, and the Akhaians know, these things. 
But give me a fast ship and a crew of twenty 
who will see me through a voyage, out and back. 
I'll go to sandy Pylos, then to Sparta, 
for news of Father since he sailed from Troy— 
some traveller’s tale, perhaps, or rumored fame 
issued from Zeus himself into the world. 
If he’s alive, and beating his way home, 
I might hold out for another weary year; 
but if they tell me that he’s dead and gone, 
then I can come back to my own dear country 
and raise a mound for him, and burn his gear, 
with all the funeral honors that befit him, 
and give my mother to another husband.” 
The boy sat down in silence. Next to stand 
was Mentor, comrade in arms of the prince Odysseus, 
an old man now. Odysseus left him authority 
over his house and slaves, to guard them well. 
In his concern, he spoke to the assembly: 
“Hear me, Ithakans! Hear what I have to say. 
Let no man holding scepter as a king 
be thoughtful, mild, kindly, or virtuous; 
let him be cruel, and practice evil ways; 
it is so clear that no one here remembers 
how like a gentle father Odysseus ruled you. 
I find it less revolting that the suitors 
carry their malice into violent acts; 
at least they stake their lives 
when they go pillaging the house of Odysseus— 
their lives upon it, he will not come again. 
What sickens me is to see the whole community 
sitting still, and never a voice or a hand raised 
against them—a mere handful compared with you.” 
Ledkritos, Euenor’s son, replied to him: 
“Mentor, what mischief are you raking up? 
Will this crowd risk the sword’s edge over a dinner? 
Suppose Odysseus himself indeed 
came in and found the suitors at his table: 
he might be hot to drive them out. What then? 
Never would he enjoy his wife again— 
the wife who loves him well; he’d only bring down 
abject death on himself against those odds. 
Madness, to talk of fighting in either case. 
Now let all present go about their business! 
Halithersés and Mentor will speed the traveller; 
they can help him: they were his father’s friends. 
I rather think he will be sitting here 
a long time yet, waiting for news on Ithaka; 
that seafaring he spoke of is beyond him.” 
On this note they were quick to end their parley. 
The assembly broke up; everyone went home— 
the suitors home to Odysseus’ house again. 
But Telémakhos walked down along the shore 
and washed his hands in the foam of the grey sea, 
then said this prayer: 
“O god of yesterday, 
guest in our house, who told me to take ship 
on the hazy sea for news of my lost father, 
listen to me, be near me: 
the Akhaians only wait, or hope to hinder me, 
the damned insolent suitors most of all.” 
Athena was nearby and came to him, 
putting on Mentor’s figure and his tone, 
the warm voice in a lucid flight of words: 
“You’ll never be fainthearted or a fool, 
Telémakhos, if you have your father’s spirit; 
he finished what he cared to say, 
and what he took in hand he brought to pass. 
The sea routes will yield their distances 
to his true son, Penélopé’s true son,— 
I doubt another’s luck would hold so far. 
The son is rare who measures with his father, 
and one in a thousand is a better man, 
but you will have the sap and wit 
and prudence—for you get that from Odysseus— 
to give you a fair chance of winning through. 
So never mind the suitors and their ways, 
there is no judgment in them, neither do they 
know anything of death and the black terror 
close upon them—doom’s day on them all. 
You need not linger over going to sea. 
I sailed beside your father in the old days, 
I'll find a ship for you, and help you sail her. 
So go on home, as if to join the suitors, 
but get provisions ready in containers— 
wine in two-handled jugs and barley meal, 
the staying power of oarsmen, 
in skin bags, watertight. I’ll go the rounds 
and call a crew of volunteers together. 
Hundreds of ships are beached on sea-girt Ithaka; 
let me but choose the soundest, old or new, 
we'll rig her and take her out on the broad sea.” 
This was the divine speech Telémakhos heard 
from Athena, Zeus’s daughter. He stayed no longer, 
but took his heartache home, 
and found the robust suitors there at work, 
skinning goats and roasting pigs in the courtyard. 
Antinoos came straight over, laughing at him, 
and took him by the hand with a bold greeting: 
“High-handed Telémakhos, control your temper! 
Come on, get over it, no more grim thoughts, 
but feast and drink with me, the way you used to. 
The Akhaians will attend to all you ask for— 
ship, crew, and crossing to the holy land 
of Pylos, for the news about your father.” 
Telémakhos replied with no confusion: 
“Antinos, I cannot see myself again 
taking a quiet dinner in this company. 
Isn’t it enough that you could strip my house 
under my very nose when I was young? 
Now that I know, being grown, what others say, 
I understand it all, and my heart is full. 
TIl bring black doom upon you if I can— 
either in Pylos, if I go, or in this country. 
And I will go, go all the way, if only 
as someone’s passenger. I have no ship, 
no oarsmen: and it suits you that I have none.” 
Calmly he drew his hand from Antinoés’ hand. 
At this the suitors, while they dressed their meat, 
began to exchange loud mocking talk about him. 
One young toplofty gallant set the tone: 
“Well, think of that! 
Telémakhos has a mind to murder us. 
He’s going to lead avengers out of Pylos, 
or Sparta, maybe; oh, he’s wild to do it. 
Or else he’ll try the fat land of Ephyra— 
he can get poison there, and bring it home, 
doctor the wine jar and dispatch us all.” 
Another took the cue: 
“Well now, who knows? 
He might be lost at sea, just like Odysseus, 
knocking around in a ship, far from his friends. 
And what a lot of trouble that would give us, 
making the right division of his things! 
We'd keep his house as dowry for his mother— 
his mother and the man who marries her.” 
That was the drift of it. Telémakhos 
went on through to the storeroom of his father, 
a great vault where gold and bronze lay piled 
along with chests of clothes, and fragrant oil. 
And there were jars of earthenware in rows 
holding an old wine, 
mellow, unmixed, and rare; cool stood the jars 
against the wall, kept for whatever day 
Odysseus, worn by hardships, might come home. 
The double folding doors were tightly locked 
and guarded, night and day, by the serving woman, 
Eurykleia, grand-daughter of Peisénor, 
in all her duty vigilant and shrewd. 
Telémakhos called her to the storeroom, saying: 
“Nurse, get a few two-handled travelling jugs 
filled up with wine—the second best, not that 
you keep for your unlucky lord and king, 
hoping he may have slipped away from death 
and may yet come again—royal Odysseus. 
Twelve amphorai will do; seal them up tight. 
And pour out barley into leather bags— 
twenty bushels of barley meal ground fine. 
Now keep this to yourself! Collect these things, 
and after dark, when mother has retired 
and gone upstairs to bed, Pll come for them. 
I sail to sandy Pylos, then to Sparta, 
to see what news there is of Father’s voyage.” 
His loving nurse Eurykleia gave a cry, 
and tears sprang to her eyes as she wailed softly: 
“Dear child, whatever put this in your head? 
Why do you want to go so far in the world— 
and you our only darling? Lord Odysseus 
died in some strange place, far from his homeland. 
Think how, when you have turned your back, these men 
will plot to kill you and share all your things! 
Stay with your own, dear, do. Why should you suffer 
hardship and homelessness on the wild sea?” 
But seeing all clear, Telémakhos replied: 
“Take heart, Nurse, there’s a god behind this plan. 
And you must swear to keep it from my mother, 
until the eleventh day, or twelfth, or till 
she misses me, or hears that I am gone. 
She must not tear her lovely skin lamenting.” 
So the old woman vowed by all the gods, 
and vowed again, to carry out his wishes; 
then she filled up the amphorai with wine 
and sifted barley meal into leather bags. 
Telémakhos rejoined the suitors. 
Meanwhile 
the goddess with grey eyes had other business: 
disguised as Telémakhos, she roamed the town 
taking each likely man aside and telling him: 
“Meet us at nightfall at the ship!” Indeed, 
she asked Noémon, Phronios’ wealthy son, 
to lend her a fast ship, and he complied. 
Now when at sundown shadows crossed the lanes 
she dragged the cutter to the sea and launched it, 
fitted out with tough seagoing gear, 
and tied it up, away at the harbor’s edge. 
The crewmen gathered, sent there by the goddess. 
Then it occurred to the grey-eyed goddess Athena 
to pass inside the house of the hero Odysseus, 
showering a sweet drowsiness on the suitors, 
whom she had presently wandering in their wine; 
and soon, as they could hold their cups no longer, 
they straggled off to find their beds in town, 
eyes heavy-lidded, laden down with sleep. 
Then to Telémakhos the grey-eyed goddess 
appeared again with Mentor’s form and voice, 
calling him out of the lofty emptied hall: 
“Telémakhos, your crew of fighting men 
is ready at the oars, and waiting for you; 
come on, no point in holding up the sailing.” 
And Pallas Athena turned like the wind, running 
ahead of him. He followed in her footsteps 
down to the seaside, where they found the ship, 
and oarsmen with flowing hair at the water’s edge. 
Telémakhos, now strong in the magic, cried: 
“Come with me, friends, and get our rations down! 
They are all packed at home, and my own mother 
knows nothing!—only one maid was told.” 
He turned and led the way, and they came after, 
carried and stowed all in the well-trimmed ship 
as the dear son of Odysseus commanded. 
Telémakhos then stepped aboard; Athena 
took her position aft, and he sat by her. 
The two stroke oars cast off the stern hawsers 
and vaulted over the gunnels to their benches. 
Grey-eyed Athena stirred them a following wind, 
soughing from the north-west on the winedark sea, 
and as he felt the wind, Telémakhos 
called to all hands to break out mast and sail. 
They pushed the fir mast high and stepped it firm 
amidships in the box, made fast the forestays, 
then hoisted up the white sail on its halyards 
until the wind caught, booming in the sail; 
and a flushing wave sang backward from the bow 
on either side, as the ship got way upon her, 
holding her steady course. 
Now they made all secure in the fast black ship, 
and, setting out the winebowls all a-brim, 
they made libation to the gods, 
the undying, the ever-new, 
most of all to the grey-eyed daughter of Zeus. 
And the prow sheared through the night into the dawn. 


BOOK 3

The sun rose on the flawless brimming sea 
into a sky all brazen—all one brightening 
for gods immortal and for mortal men 
on plowlands kind with grain. 
And facing sunrise 
the voyagers now lay off Pylos town, 
compact stronghold of Neleus. On the shore 
black bulls were being offered by the people 
to the blue-maned god who makes the islands tremble: 
nine congregations, each five hundred strong, 
led out nine bulls apiece to sacrifice, 
taking the tripes to eat, while on their altars 
thighbones in fat lay burning for the god. 
Here they put in, furled sail, and beached the ship; 
but Telémakhos hung back in disembarking, 
so that Athena turned and said: 
“Not the least shyness, now, Telémakhos, 
You came across the open sea for this— 
to find out where the great earth hides your father 
and what the doom was that he came upon. 
Go to old Nestor, master charioteer, 
so we may broach the storehouse of his mind. 
Ask him with courtesy, and in his wisdom 
he will tell you history and no lies.” 
But clear-headed Telémakhos replied: 
“Mentor; how can I do it, how approach him? 
I have no practice in elaborate speeches, and 
for a young man to interrogate an old man 
seems disrespectful—” 
But the grey-eyed goddess said: 
“Reason and heart will give you words, Telémakhos; 
and a spirit will counsel others. I should say 
the gods were never indifferent to your life.” 
She went on quickly, and he followed her 
to where the men of Pylos had their altars. 
Nestor appeared enthroned among his sons, 
while friends around them skewered the red beef 
or held it scorching. When they saw the strangers 
a hail went up, and all that crowd came forward 
calling out invitations to the feast. 
Peisistratos in the lead, the young prince, 
caught up their hands in his and gave them places 
on curly lambskins flat on the sea sand 
near Thrasymédés, his brother, and his father; 
he passed them bits of the food of sacrifice, 
and, pouring wine in a golden cup, 
he said to Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus: 
“Friend, I must ask you to invoke Poseidon: 
you find us at this feast, kept in his honor. 
Make the appointed offering then, and pray, 
and give the honeyed winecup to your friend 
so he may do the same. He, too, 
must pray to the gods on whom all men depend, 
but he is just my age, you are the senior, 
so here, I give the goblet first to you.” 
And he put the cup of sweet wine in her hand. 
Athena liked his manners, and the equity 
that gave her precedence with the cup of gold, 
so she besought Poseidon at some length: 
“Earthshaker, listen and be well disposed. 
Grant your petitioners everything they ask: 
above all, honor to Nestor and his sons; 
second, to every man of Pylos town 
a fair gift in exchange for this hekatomb; 
third, may Telémakhos and I perform 
the errand on which last night we put to sea.” 
This was the prayer of Athena— 
granted in every particular by herself. 
She passed the beautiful wine cup to Telémakhos, 
who tipped the wine and prayed as she had done. 
Meanwhile the spits were taken off the fire, 
portions of crisp meat for all. They feasted, 
and when they had eaten and drunk their fill, at last 
they heard from Nestor, prince of charioteers: 
“Now is the time,” he said, “for a few questions, 
now that our young guests have enjoyed their dinner. 
Who are you, strangers? Where are you sailing from, 
and where to, down the highways of sea water? 
Have you some business here? or are you, now, 
reckless wanderers of the sea, like those corsairs 
who risk their lives to prey on other men?” 
Clear-headed Telémakhos responded cheerfully, 
for Athena gave him heart. By her design 
his quest for news about his father’s wandering 
would bring him fame in the world’s eyes. So he said: 
“Nestor, pride of Akhaians, Neleus’ son, 
you ask where we are from, and I can tell you: 
our home port is under Mount Neion, Ithaka. 
We are not here on Ithakan business, though, 
but on my own. I want news of my father, 
Odysseus, known for his great heart, and I 
will comb the wide world for it. People say 
he fought along with you when Troy was taken. 
As to the other men who fought that war, 
we know where each one died, and how he died; 
but Zeus allotted my father death and mystery. 
No one can say for sure where he was killed, 
whether some hostile landsmen or the sea, 
the stormwaves on the deep sea, got the best of him. 
And this is why I come to you for help. 
Tell me of his death, sir, if perhaps 
you witnessed it, or have heard some wanderer 
tell the tale. The man was born for trouble. 
Spare me no part of it for kindness’ sake, 
but put the scene before me as you saw it. 
If ever Odysseus my noble father 
served you by promise kept or work accomplished 
in the land of Troy, where you Akhaians suffered, 
recall those things for me the way they were.” 
Then Nestor, prince of charioteers, made answer: 
“Dear friend, you take me back to all the trouble 
we went through in that country, we Akhaians: 
rough days aboard ship on the cloudy sea 
cruising away for pillage after Akhilleus; 
rough days of battle around Priam’s town. 
Our losses, then—so many good men gone: 
Ares’ great Aias lies there, Akhilleus lies there, 
Patréklos, too, the wondrous counselor, 
and my own strong and princely son, Antilokhos— 
fastest man of them all, and a born fighter. 
Other miseries, and many, we endured there. 
Could any mortal man tell the whole story? 
Not if you stayed five years or six to hear 
how hard it was for the flower of the Akhaians; 
you’d go home weary, and the tale untold. 
Think: we were there nine years, and we tried everything, 
all stratagems against them, 
up to the bitter end that Zeus begrudged us. 
And as to stratagems, no man would claim 
Odysseus’ gift for those. He had no rivals, 
your father, at the tricks of war. 
Your father? 
Well, I must say I marvel at the sight of you: 
your manner of speech couldn’t be more like his; 
one would say No; no boy could speak so well. 
And all that time at Ilion, he and I 
were never at odds in council or assembly— 
saw things the same way, had one mind between us 
in all the good advice we gave the Argives. 
But when we plundered Priam’s town and tower 
and took to the ships, God scattered the Akhaians. 
He had a mind to make homecoming hard for them, 
seeing they would not think straight nor behave, 
or some would not. So evil days came on them, 
and she who had been angered, 
Zeus’s dangerous grey-eyed daughter, did it, 
starting a fight between the sons of Atreus. 
First they were fools enough to call assembly 
at sundown, unheard of hour; 
the Akhaian soldiers turned out, soaked with wine, 
to hear talk, talk about it from their commanders: 
Menelaos harangued them to get organized— 
time to ride home on the sea’s broad back, he said; 
but Agamemnon wouldn’t hear of it. He wanted 
to hold the troops, make sacrifice, a hekatomb, 
something to pacify Athena’s rage. 
Folly again, to think that he could move her. 
Will you change the will of the everlasting gods 
in a night or a day’s time? 
The two men stood there hammering at each other 
until the army got to its feet with a roar, 
and no decision, wanting it both ways. 
That night no one slept well, everyone cursing 
someone else. Here was the bane from Zeus. 
At dawn we dragged our ships to the lordly water, 
stowed aboard all our plunder 
and the slave women in their low hip girdles. 
But half the army elected to stay behind 
with Agamemnon as their corps commander; 
the other half embarked and pulled away. 
We made good time, the huge sea smoothed before us, 
and held our rites when we reached Ténedos, 
being wild for home. But Zeus, not willing yet, 
now cruelly set us at odds a second time, 
and one lot turned, put back in the rolling ships, 
under command of the subtle captain, Odysseus; 
their notion was to please Lord Agamemnon. 
Not I. I fled, with every ship I had; 
I knew fate had some devilment brewing there. 
Diomedes roused his company and fled, too, 
and later Menelaos, the red-haired captain, 
caught up with us at Lesbos, 
while we mulled over the long sea route, unsure 
whether to lay our course northward of Khios, 
keeping the Isle of Psyria off to port, 
or inside Khios, coasting by windy Mimas. 
We asked for a sign from heaven, and the sign came 
to cut across the open sea to Euboia, 
and lose no time putting our ills behind us. 
The wind freshened astern, and the ships ran 
before the wind on paths of the deep sea fish, 
making Geraistos before dawn. We thanked Poseidon 
with many a charred thighbone for that crossing. 
On the fourth day, Diomedes’ company 
under full sail put in at Argos port, 
and I held on for Pylos. The fair wind, 
once heaven set it blowing, never failed. 
So this, dear child, was how I came from Troy, 
and saw no more of the others, lost or saved. 
But you are welcome to all I’ve heard since then 
at home; I have no reason to keep it from you. 
The Myrmidon spearfighters returned, they say, 
under the son of lionhearted Akhilleus; 
and so did Poias’ great son, Philoktetes. 
Idomeneus brought his company back to Krete; 
the sea took not a man from him, of all 
who lived through the long war. 
And even as far away as Ithaka 
you’ve heard of Agamémnon—how he came 
home, how Aigisthos waited to destroy him 
but paid a bitter price for it in the end. 
That is a good thing, now, for a man to leave 
a son behind him, like the son who punished 
Aigisthos for the murder of his great father. 
You, too, are tall and well set-up, I see; 
be brave, you too, so men in times to come 
will speak well of you.” 
Then Telémakhos said: 
“Nestor, pride of Akhaians, Neleus’ son, 
that was revenge, and far and wide the Akhaians 
will tell the tale in song for generations. 
I wish the gods would buckle his arms on me! 
Td be revenged for outrage 
on my insidious and brazen enemies. 
But no such happy lot was given to me 
or to my father. Still, I must hold fast.” 
To this Lord Nestor of Gerénia said: 
“My dear young friend, now that you speak of it, 
I hear a crowd of suitors for your mother 
lives with you, uninvited, making trouble. 
Now tell me how you take this. Do the people 
side against you, hearkening to some oracle? 
Who knows, your father might come home someday 
alone or backed by troops, and have it out with them. 
If grey-eyed Athena loved you 
the way she did Odysseus in the old days, 
in Troy country, where we all went through so much— 
never have I seen the gods help any man 
as openly as Athena did your father— 
well, as I say, if she cared for you that way, 
there would be those to quit this marriage game.” 
But prudently Telémakhos replied: 
“T can’t think what you say will ever happen, sir. 
It is a dazzling hope. But not for me. 
It could not be—even if the gods willed it.” 
At this grey-eyed Athena broke in, saying: 
“What strange talk you permit yourself, Telémakhos, 
A god could save the man by simply wishing it— 
from the farthest shore in the world. 
If I were he, I should prefer to suffer 
years at sea, and then be safe at home; 
better that than a knife at my hearthside 
where Agamemnon found it—killed by adulterers. 
Though as for death, of course all men must suffer it: 
the gods may love a man, but they can’t help him 
when cold death comes to lay him on his bier.” 
Telémakhos replied: 
“Mentor, grievously though we miss my father, why 
go on as if that homecoming could happen? 
You know the gods had settled it already, 
years ago, when dark death came for him. 
But there is something else I imagine Nestor 
can tell us, knowing as he does the ways of men. 
They say his rule goes back over three generations, 
so long, so old, it seems death cannot touch him. 
Nestor, Neleus’ son, true sage, say how 
did the Lord of the Great Plains, Agamemnon, die? 
What was the trick Aigisthos used 
to kill the better man? And Meneláos, 
where was he? Not at Argos in Akhaia, 
but blown off course, held up in some far country, 
is that what gave the killer nerve to strike?” 
Lord Nestor of Gerenia made answer: 
“Well, now, my son, Pll tell you the whole story. 
You know, yourself, what would have come to pass 
if red-haired Menelaos, back from Troy, 
had caught Aigisthos in that house alive. 
There would have been no burial mound for him, 
but dogs and carrion birds to huddle on him 
in the fields beyond the wall, and not a soul 
bewailing him, for the great wrong he committed. 
While we were hard-pressed in the war at Troy 
he stayed safe inland in the grazing country, 
making light talk to win Agamémnon’s queen. 
But the Lady Klytaimnestra, in the first days, 
rebuffed him, being faithful still; 
then, too, she had at hand as her companion 
a minstrel Agamemnon left attending her, 
charged with her care, when he took ship for Troy. 
Then came the fated hour when she gave in. 
Her lover tricked the poet and marooned him 
on a bare island for the seabirds’ picking, 
and took her home, as he and she desired. 
Many thighbones he burned on the gods’ altars 
and many a woven and golden ornament 
hung to bedeck them, in his satisfaction; 
he had not thought life held such glory for him. 
Now Menelaos and I sailed home together 
on friendly terms, from Troy, 
but when we came off Sunion Point in Attika, 
the ships still running free, Onetor’s son 
Phrontis, the steersman of Menelaos’ ship, 
fell over with a death grip on the tiller: 
some unseen arrow from Apollo hit him. 
No man handled a ship better than he did 
in a high wind and sea, so Meneláos 
put down his longing to get on, and landed 
to give this man full honor in funeral. 
His own luck turned then. Out on the winedark sea 
in the murmuring hulls again, he made Cape Malea, 
but Zeus who views the wide world sent a gloom 
over the ocean, and a howling gale 
came on with seas increasing, mountainous, 
parting the ships and driving half toward Krete 
where the Kydonians live by lardanos river. 
Off Gortyn’s coastline in the misty sea there 
a reef, a razorback, cuts through the water, 
and every westerly piles up a pounding 
surf along the left side, going toward Phaistos— 
big seas buffeted back by the narrow stone. 
They were blown here, and fought in vain for sea room; 
the ships kept going in to their destruction, 
slammed on the reef. The crews were saved. But now 
those five that weathered it got off to southward, 
taken by wind and current on to Egypt; 
and there Menelaos stayed. He made a fortune 
in sea traffic among those distant races, 
but while he did so, the foul crime was planned 
and carried out in Argos by Aigisthos, 
who ruled over golden Mykenai seven years. 
Seven long years, with Agamemnon dead, 
he held the people down, before the vengeance. 
But in the eighth year, back from exile in Attika, 
Orestes killed the snake who killed his father. 
He gave his hateful mother and her soft man 
a tomb together, and proclaimed the funeral day 
a festal day for all the Argive people. 
That day Lord Meneláos of the great war cry 
made port with all the gold his ships could carry. 
And this should give you pause, my son: 
don’t stay too long away from home, leaving 
your treasure there, and brazen suitors near; 
they’ll squander all you have or take it from you, 
and then how will your journey serve? 
I urge you, though, to call on Menelaos, 
he being but lately home from distant parts 
in the wide world. A man could well despair 
of getting home at all, if the winds blew him 
over the Great South Sea—that weary waste, 
even the wintering birds delay 
one winter more before the northward crossing. 
Well, take your ship and crew and go by water, 
or if you’d rather go by land, here are 
horses, a car, and my own sons for company 
as far as the ancient land of Lakedaimon 
and Meneláos, the red-haired captain there. 
Ask him with courtesy, and in his wisdom 
he will tell you history and no lies.” 
While Nestor talked, the sun went down the sky 
and gloom came on the land, 
and now the grey-eyed goddess Athena said: 
“Sir, this is all most welcome and to the point, 
but why not slice the bulls’ tongues now, and mix 
libations for Poseidon and the gods? 
Then we can all retire; high time we did; 
the light is going under the dark world’s rim, 
better not linger at the sacred feast.” 
When Zeus’s daughter spoke, they turned to listen, 
and soon the squires brought water for their hands, 
while stewards filled the winebowls and poured out 
a fresh cup full for every man. The company 
stood up to fling the tongues and a shower of wine 
over the flames, then drank their thirst away. 
Now finally Telémakhos and Athena 
bestirred themselves, turning away to the ship, 
but Nestor put a hand on each, and said: 
“Now Zeus forbid, and the other gods as well, 
that you should spend the night on board, and leave me 
as though I were some pauper without a stitch, 
no blankets in his house, no piles of rugs, 
no sleeping soft for host or guest! Far from it! 
I have all these, blankets and deep-piled rugs, 
and while I live the only son of Odysseus 
will never make his bed on a ship’s deck— 
no, not while sons of mine are left at home 
to welcome any guest who comes to us.” 
The grey-eyed goddess Athena answered him: 
“You are very kind, sir, and Telémakhos 
should do as you ask. That is the best thing. 
He will go with you, and will spend the night 
under your roof. But I must join our ship 
and talk to the crew, to keep their spirits up, 
since I’m the only senior in the company. 
The rest are boys who shipped for friendship’s sake, 
no older than Telémakhos, any of them. 
Let me sleep out, then, by the black hull’s side, 
this night at least. At daybreak I’ll be off 
to see the Kaukonians about a debt they owe me, 
an old one and no trifle. As for your guest, 
send him off in a car, with one of your sons, 
and give him thoroughbreds, a racing team.” 
Even as she spoke, Athena left them—seeming 
a seahawk, in a clap of wings,—and all 
the Akhaians of Pylos town looked up astounded. 
Awed then by what his eyes had seen, the old man 
took Telémakhos’ hand and said warmly: 
“My dear child, I can have no fears for you, 
no doubt about your conduct or your heart, 
if, at your age, the gods are your companions. 
Here we had someone from Olympos—clearly 
the glorious daughter of Zeus, his third child, 
who held your father dear among the Argives. 
O, Lady, hear me! Grant an illustrious name 
to me and to my children and my dear wife! 
A noble heifer shall be yours in sacrifice, 
one that no man has ever yoked or driven; 
my gift to you—her horns all sheathed in gold.” 
So he ended, praying; and Athena heard him. 
Then Nestor of Gerenia led them all, 
his sons and sons-in-law, to his great house; 
and in they went to the famous hall of Nestor, 
taking their seats on thrones and easy chairs, 
while the old man mixed water in a wine bowl 
with sweet red wine, mellowed eleven years 
before his housekeeper uncapped the jar. 
He mixed and poured his offering, repeating 
prayers to Athena, daughter of royal Zeus. 
The others made libation, and drank deep, 
then all the company went to their quarters, 
and Nestor of Gerenia showed Telémakhos 
under the echoing eastern entrance hall 
to a fine bed near the bed of Peisistratos, 
captain of spearmen, his unmarried son. 
Then he lay down in his own inner chamber 
where his dear faithful wife had smoothed his bed. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose, 
Lord Nestor of Gerenia, charioteer, 
left his room for a throne of polished stone, 
white and gleaming as though with oil, that stood 
before the main gate of the palace; Neleus here 
had sat before him—masterful in kingship, 
Neleus, long ago a prey to death, gone down 
to the night of the underworld. 
So Nestor held his throne and scepter now, 
lord of the western approaches to Akhaia. 
And presently his sons came out to join him, 
leaving the palace: Ekhéphron and Stratios, 
Perseus and Arêtós and Thrasymédés, 
and after them the prince Peisistratos, 
bringing Telémakhos along with him. 
Seeing all present, the old lord Nestor said: 
“Dear sons, here is my wish, and do it briskly 
to please the gods, Athena first of all, 
my guest in daylight at our holy feast. 
One of you must go for a young heifer 
and have the cowherd lead her from the pasture. 
Another call on Lord Telémakhos’ ship 
to invite his crewmen, leaving two behind; 
and someone else again send for the goldsmith, 
Laerkes, to gild the horns. 
The rest stay here together. Tell the servants 
a ritual feast will be prepared in hall. 
Tell them to bring seats, firewood and fresh water.” 
Before he finished, they were about these errands. 
The heifer came from pasture, 
the crewmen of Telémakhos from the ship, 
the smith arrived, bearing the tools of his trade— 
hammer and anvil, and the precision tongs 
he handled fiery gold with,—and Athena 
came as a god comes, numinous, to the rites. 
The smith now gloved each horn in a pure foil 
beaten out of the gold that Nestor gave him— 
a glory and delight for the goddess’ eyes— 
while Ekhéphron and Stratios held the horns. 
Arétés brought clear lustral water 
in a bowl quivering with fresh-cut flowers, 
a basket of barley in his other hand. 
Thrasymedes who could stand his ground in war, 
stood ready, with a sharp two-bladed axe, 
for the stroke of sacrifice, and Perseus 
held a bowl for the blood. And now Nestor, 
strewing the barley grains, and water drops, 
pronounced his invocation to Athena 
and burned a pinch of bristles from the victim. 
When prayers were said and all the grain was scattered 
great-hearted Thrasymedes in a flash 
swung the axe, at one blow cutting through 
the neck tendons. The heifer’s spirit failed. 
Then all the women gave a wail of joy— 
daughters, daughters-in-law, and the Lady Eurydiké, 
Klyménos’ eldest daughter. But the men 
still held the heifer, shored her up 
from the wide earth where the living go their ways, 
until Peisistratos cut her throat across, 
the black blood ran, and life ebbed from her marrow. 
The carcass now sank down, and they disjointed 
shoulder and thigh bone, wrapping them in fat, 
two layers, folded, with raw strips of flesh. 
These offerings Nestor burned on the split-wood fire 
and moistened with red wine. His sons took up 
five-tined forks in their hands, while the altar flame 
ate through the bones, and bits of tripe went round. 
Then came the carving of the quarters, and they spitted 
morsels of lean meat on the long sharp tines 
and broiled them at arm’s length upon the fire. 
Polykasté, a fair girl, Nestor’s youngest, 
had meanwhile given a bath to Telémakhos— 
bathing him first, then rubbing him with oil. 
She held fine clothes and a cloak to put around him 
when he came godlike from the bathing place; 
then out he went to take his place with Nestor. 
When the best cuts were broiled and off the spits, 
they all sat down to banquet. Gentle squires 
kept every golden wine cup brimming full. 
And so they feasted to their heart’s content, 
until the prince of charioteers commanded: 
“Sons, harness the blood mares for Telémakhos; 
hitch up the car, and let him take the road.” 
They swung out smartly to do the work, and hooked 
the handsome horses to a chariot shaft. 
The mistress of the stores brought up provisions 
of bread and wine, with victuals fit for kings, 
and Telémakhos stepped up on the painted car. 
Just at his elbow stood Peisistratos, 
captain of spearmen, reins in hand. He gave 
a flick to the horses, and with streaming manes 
they ran for the open country. The tall town 
of Pylos sank behind them in the distance, 
as all day long they kept the harness shaking. 
The sun was low and shadows crossed the lanes 
when they arrived at Pherai. There Didklés, 
son of Ortilokhos whom Alpheios fathered, 
qwelcomed the young men, and they slept the night. 
But up when the young Dawn’s finger tips of rose 
opened in the east, they hitched the team 
once more to the painted car, 
and steered out eastward through the echoing gate, 
whipping their fresh horses into a run. 
That day they made the grainlands of Lakedaimon, 
where, as the horses held to a fast clip, 
they kept on to their journey’s end. Behind them 
the sun went down and all the roads grew dark. 


BOOK 4

By vales and sharp ravines in Lakedaimon 
the travellers drove to Meneláos’ mansion, 
and found him at a double wedding feast 
for son and daughter. 
Long ago at Troy 
he pledged her to the heir of great Akhilleus, 
breaker of men—a match the gods had ripened; 
so he must send her with a chariot train 
to the town and glory of the Myrmidons. 
And that day, too, he brought Alektor’s daughter 
to marry his tall scion, Megapénthés, 
born of a slave girl during the long war— 
for the gods had never after granted Helen 
a child to bring into the sunlit world 
after the first, rose-lipped Hermioné, 
a girl like the pale-gold goddess Aphrodite. 
Down the great hall in happiness they feasted, 
neighbors of Meneláos, and his kin, 
for whom a holy minstrel harped and sang; 
and two lithe tumblers moved out on the song 
with spins and handsprings through the company. 
Now when Telémakhos and Nestor’s son 
pulled up their horses at the main gate, 
one of the king’s companions in arms, Etedéneus, 
going outside, caught sight of them. He turned 
and passed through court and hall to tell the master, 
stepping up close to get his ear. Said he: 
“Two men are here—two strangers, Menelaos, 
but nobly born Akhaians, they appear. 
What do you say, shall we unhitch their team, 
or send them on to someone free to receive them?” 
The red-haired captain answered him in anger: 
. “You were no idiot before, Eteéneus, 
but here you are talking like a child of ten. 
Could we have made it home again—and Zeus 
give us no more hard roving!—if other men 
had never fed us, given us lodging? 
Bring 
these men to be our guests: unhitch their team!” 
Etedneus left the long room like an arrow, 
calling equerries after him, on the run. 
Outside, they freed the sweating team from harness, 
stabled the horses, tied them up, and showered 
bushels of wheat and barley in the feed box; 
then leaned the chariot pole 
against the gleaming entry wall of stone 
and took the guests in. What a brilliant place 
that mansion of the great prince seemed to them! 
A-glitter everywhere, as though with fiery 
points of sunlight, lusters of the moon. 
The young men gazed in joy before they entered 
into a room of polished tubs to bathe. 
Maidservants gave them baths, anointed them, 
held out fresh tunics, cloaked them warm; and soon 
they took tall thrones beside the son of Atreus. 
Here a maid tipped out water for their hands 
from a golden pitcher into a silver bowl, 
and set a polished table near at hand; 
the larder mistress with her tray of loaves 
and savories came, dispensing all her best, 
and then a carver heaped their platters high 
with various meats, and put down cups of gold. 
Now said the red-haired captain, Meneláos, 
gesturing: 
“Welcome; and fall to; in time, 
when you have supped, we hope to hear your names, 
forbears and families—in your case, it seems, 
no anonymities, but lordly men. 
Lads like yourselves are not base born.” 
At this, 
he lifted in his own hands the king’s portion, 
a chine of beef, and set it down before them. 
Seeing all ready then, they took their dinner; 
but when they had feasted well, 
Telémakhos could not keep still, but whispered, 
his head bent close, so the others might not hear: 
“My dear friend, can you believe your eyes?— 
the murmuring hall, how luminous it is 
with bronze, gold, amber, silver, and ivory! 
This is the way the court of Zeus must be, 
inside, upon Olympos. What a wonder!” 
But splendid Meneláos had overheard him 
and spoke out on the instant to them both: 
“Young friends, no mortal man can vie with Zeus. 
His home and all his treasures are for ever. 
But as for men, it may well be that few 
have more than I. How painfully I wandered 
before I brought it home! Seven years at sea, 
Kypros, Phoinikia, Egypt, and still farther 
among the sun-burnt races. 
I saw the men of Sidon and Arabia 
and Libya, too, where lambs are horned at birth. 
In every year they have three lambing seasons, 
so no man, chief or shepherd, ever goes 
hungry for want of mutton, cheese, or milk— 
all year at milking time there are fresh ewes. 
But while I made my fortune on those travels 
a stranger killed my brother, in cold blood,— 
tricked blind, caught in the web of his deadly queen. 
What pleasure can I take, then, being lord 
over these costly things? 
You must have heard your fathers tell my story, 
whoever your fathers are; you must know of my life, 
the anguish I once had, and the great house 
full of my treasure, left in desolation. 
How gladly I should live one third as rich 
to have my friends back safe at home!—my friends 
who died on Troy’s wide seaboard, far 
from the grazing lands of Argos. 
But as things are, nothing but grief is left me 
for those companions. While I sit at home 
sometimes hot tears come, and I revel in them, 
or stop before the surfeit makes me shiver. 
And there is one I miss more than the other 
dead I mourn for; sleep and food alike 
grow hateful when I think of him. No soldier 
took on so much, went through so much, as Odysseus. 
That seems to have been his destiny, and this mine— 
to feel each day the emptiness of his absence, 
ignorant, even, whether he lived or died. 
How his old father and his quiet wife, 
Penelope, must miss him still! 
And Telemakhos, whom he left as a new-born child.” 
Now hearing these things said, the boy’s heart rose 
in a long pang for his father, and he wept, 
holding his purple mantle with both hands 
before his eyes. Meneláos knew him now, 
and so fell silent with uncertainty 
whether to let him speak and name his father 
in his own time, or to inquire, and prompt him. 
And while he pondered, Helen came 
out of her scented chamber, a moving grace 
like Artemis, straight as a shaft of gold. 
Beside her came Adraste, to place her armchair, 
Alkippé, with a rug of downy wool, 
and Phylo, bringing a silver basket, once 
given by Alkandré, the wife of Pélybos, 
in the treasure city, Thebes of distant Egypt. 
He gave two silver bathtubs to Meneláos 
and a pair of tripods, with ten pure gold bars, 
and she, then, made these beautiful gifts to Helen: 
a golden distaff, and the silver basket 
rimmed in hammered gold, with wheels to run on. 
So Phylo rolled it in to stand beside her, 
heaped with fine spun stuff, and cradled on it 
the distaff swathed in dusky violet wool. 
Reclining in her light chair with its footrest, 
Helen gazed at her husband and demanded: 
“Meneláos, my lord, have we yet heard 
our new guests introduce themselves? Shall I 
dissemble what I feel? No, I must say it. 
Never, anywhere, have I seen so great a likeness 
in man or woman—but it is truly strange! 
This boy must be the son of Odysseus, 
Telémakhos, the child he left at home 
that year the Akhaian host made war on Troy— 
daring all for the wanton that I was.” 
And the red-haired captain, Meneláos, answered: 
“My dear, I see the likeness as well as you do. 
Odysseus’ hands and feet were like this boy’s; 
his head, and hair, and the glinting of his eyes. 
Not only that, but when I spoke, just now, 
of Odysseus’ years of toil on my behalf 
and all he had to endure—the boy broke down 
and wept into his cloak.” 
Now Nestor’s son, 
Peisistratos, spoke up in answer to him: 
“My lord marshal, Meneláos, son of Atreus, 
this is that hero’s son as you surmise, 
but he is gentle, and would be ashamed 
to clamor for attention before your grace 
whose words have been so moving to us both. 
Nestor, Lord of Gerenia, sent me with him 
as guide and escort; he had wished to see you, 
to be advised by you or assisted somehow. 
A father far from home means difficulty 
for an only son, with no one else to help him; 
so with Telémakhos: 
his father left the house without defenders.” 
The king with flaming hair now spoke again: 
“His son, in my house! How I loved the man, 
And how he fought through hardship for my sake! 
I swore ld cherish him above all others 
if Zeus, who views the wide world, gave us passage 
homeward across the sea in the fast ships. 
I would have settled him in Argos, brought him 
over with herds and household out of Ithaka, 
his child and all his people. I could have cleaned out 
one of my towns to be his new domain. 
And so we might have been together often 
in feasts and entertainments, never parted 
till the dark mist of death lapped over one of us. 
But God himself must have been envious, 
to batter the bruised man so that he alone 
should fail in his return.” 
A twinging ache of grief rose up in everyone, 
and Helen of Argos wept, the daughter of Zeus, 
Telémakhos and Meneláos wept, 
and tears came to the eyes of Nestor’s son— 
remembering, for his part, Antilokhos, 
whom the son of shining Dawn had killed in battle. 
But thinking of that brother, he broke out: 
“O son of Atreus, when we spoke of you 
at home, and asked about you, my old father 
would say you have the clearest mind of all. 
If it is not too much to ask, then, let us not 
weep away these hours after supper; 
I feel we should not: Dawn will soon be here! 
You understand, I would not grudge a man 
right mourning when he comes to death and doom: 
what else can one bestow on the poor dead?— 
a lock of hair sheared, and a tear let fall. 
For that matter, I, too, 
lost someone in the war at Troy—my brother, 
and no mean soldier, whom you must have known, 
although I never did,—Antilokhos. 
He ranked high as a runner and fighting man.” 
The red-haired captain Menelaos answered: 
“My lad, what you have said is only sensible, 
and you did well to speak. Yes, that was worthy 
a wise man and an older man than you are: 
you speak for all the world like Nestor’s son. 
How easily one can tell the man whose father 
had true felicity, marrying and begetting! 
And that was true of Nestor, all his days, 
down to his sleek old age in peace at home, 
with clever sons, good spearmen into the bargain. 
Come, we’ll shake off this mourning mood of ours 
and think of supper. Let the men at arms 
rinse our hands again! There will be time 
for a long talk with Telémakhos in the morning.” 
The hero Menelaos’ companion in arms, 
Asphalion, poured water for their hands, 
and once again they touched the food before them. 
But now it entered Helen’s mind 
to drop into the wine that they were drinking 
an anodyne, mild magic of forgetfulness. 
Whoever drank this mixture in the wine bowl 
would be incapable of tears that day— 
though he should lose mother and father both, 
or see, with his own eyes, a son or brother 
mauled by weapons of bronze at his own gate. 
The opiate of Zeus’s daughter bore 
this canny power. It had been supplied her 
by Polydamna, mistress of Lord Thôn, 
in Egypt, where the rich plantations grow 
herbs of all kinds, maleficent and healthful; 
and no one else knows medicine as they do, 
Egyptian heirs of Paian, the healing god. 
She drugged the wine, then, had it served, and said— 
taking again her part in the conversation— 
“O Menelaos, Atreus’ royal son, 
and you that are great heroes’ sons, you know 
how Zeus gives all of us in turn 
good luck and bad luck, being all powerful. 
So take refreshment, take your ease in hall, 
and cheer the time with stories. I’ll begin. 
Not that I think of naming, far less telling, 
every feat of that rugged man, Odysseus, 
but here is something that he dared to do 
at Troy, where you Akhaians endured the war. 
He had, first, given himself an outrageous beating 
and thrown some rags on—like a household slave— 
then slipped into that city of wide lanes 
among his enemies. So changed, he looked 
as never before upon the Akhaian beachhead, 
but like a beggar, merged in the townspeople; 
and no one there remarked him. But I knew him— 
even as he was, I knew him, 
and questioned him. How shrewdly he put me off! 
But in the end I bathed him and anointed him, 
put a fresh cloak around him, and swore an oath 
not to give him away as Odysseus to the Trojans, 
till he got back to camp where the long ships lay. 
He spoke up then, and told me 
all about the Akhaians, and their plans— 
then sworded many Trojans through the body 
on his way out with what he learned of theirs. 
The Trojan women raised a cry—but my heart 
sang—for I had come round, long before, 
to dreams of sailing home, and I repented 
the mad day Aphrodite 
drew me away from my dear fatherland, 
forsaking all—child, bridal bed, and husband— 
a man without defect in form or mind.” 
Replied the red-haired captain, Menelaos: 
“An excellent tale, my dear, and most becoming. 
In my life I have met, in many countries, 
foresight and wit in many first rate men, 
but never have I seen one like Odysseus 
for steadiness and a stout heart. Here, for instance, 
is what he did—had the cold nerve to do— 
inside the hollow horse, where we were waiting, 
picked men all of us, for the Trojan slaughter, 
when all of a sudden, you came by—I dare say 
drawn by some superhuman 
power that planned an exploit for the Trojans; 
and Deiphobos, that handsome man, came with you. 
Three times you walked around it, patting it everywhere, 
and called by name the flower of our fighters, 
making your voice sound like their wives, calling. 
Diomedes and I crouched in the center 
along with Odysseus; we could hear you plainly; 
and listening, we two were swept 
by waves of longing—to reply, or go. 
Odysseus fought us down, despite our craving, 
and all the Akhaians kept their lips shut tight, 
all but Antiklos. Desire moved his throat 
to hail you, but Odysseus’ great hands clamped 
over his jaws, and held. So he saved us all, 
till Pallas Athena led you away at last.” 
Then clear-headed Telémakhos addressed him: 
“My lord marshal, Menelaos, son of Atreus, 
all the more pity, since these valors 
could not defend him from annihilation— 
not if his heart were iron in his breast. 
But will you not dismiss us for the night now? 
Sweet sleep will be a pleasure, drifting over us.” 
He said no more, but Helen called the maids 
and sent them to make beds, with purple rugs 
piled up, and sheets outspread, and fleecy 
coverlets, in the porch inside the gate. 
The girls went out with torches in their hands, 
and presently a squire led the guests— 
Telémakhos and Nestor’s radiant son— 
under the entrance colonnade, to bed. 
Then deep in the great mansion, in his chamber, 
Menelaos went to rest, and Helen, 
queenly in her long gown, lay beside him. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
made heaven bright, the deep-lunged man of battle 
stood up, pulled on his tunic and his mantle, 
slung on a swordbelt and a new edged sword, 
tied his smooth feet into fine rawhide sandals 
and left his room, a god’s brilliance upon him. 
He sat down by Telémakhos, asking gently: 
“Telémakhos, why did you come, sir, riding 
the sea’s broad back to reach old Lakedaimon? 
A public errand or private? Why, precisely?” 
Telémakhos replied: 
“My lord marshal Menelaos, son of Atreus, 
I came to hear what news you had of Father. 
My house, my good estates are being ruined. 
Each day my mother’s bullying suitors come 
to slaughter flocks of mine and my black cattle; 
enemies crowd our home. And this is why 
I come to you for news of him who owned it. 
Tell me of his death, sir, if perhaps 
you witnessed it, or have heard some wanderer 
tell the tale. The man was born for trouble. 
Spare me no part for kindness’ sake; be harsh; 
but put the scene before me as you saw it. 
If ever Odysseus my noble father 
served you by promise kept or work accomplished 
in the land of Troy, where you Akhaians suffered, 
recall those things for me the way they were.” 
Stirred now to anger, Menelaos said: 
“Intolerable—that soft men, as those are, 
should think to lie in that great captain’s bed. 
Fawns in a lion’s lair! As if a doe 
put down her litter of sucklings there, while she 
quested a glen or cropped some grassy hollow. 
Ha! Then the lord returns to his own bed 
and deals out wretched doom on both alike. 
So will Odysseus deal out doom on these. 
O Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo! 
I pray he comes as once he was, in Lesbos, 
when he stood up to wrestle Philomeleidés— 
champion and Island King— 
and smashed him down. How the Akhaians cheered! 
If only that Odysseus met the suitors, 
they’d have their consummation, a cold bed! 
Now for your questions, let me come to the point. 
I would not misreport it for you; let me 
tell you what the Ancient of the Sea, 
who is infallible, said to me—every word. 
During my first try at a passage homeward 
the gods detained me, tied me down to Egypt— 
for I had been too scant in hekatombs, 
and gods will have the rules each time remembered. 
There is an island washed by the open sea 
lying off Nile mouth—seamen call it Pharos— 
distant a day’s sail in a clean hull 
with a brisk land breeze behind. It has a harbor, 
a sheltered bay, where shipmasters 
take on dark water for the outward voyage. 
Here the gods held me twenty days becalmed. 
No winds came up, seaward escorting winds 
for ships that ride the sea’s broad back, and so 
my stores and men were used up; we were failing 
had not one goddess intervened in pity— 
Eidothea, daughter of Proteus, 
the Ancient of the Sea. How I distressed her! 
I had been walking out alone that day— 
my sailors, thin-bellied from the long fast, 
were off with fish hooks, angling on the shore— 
then she appeared to me, and her voice sang: 
‘What fool is here, what drooping dunce of dreams? 
Or can it be, friend, that you love to suffer? 
How can you linger on this island, aimless 
and shiftless, while your people waste away?’ 
To this I quickly answered: 
‘Let me tell you, 
goddess, whatever goddess you may be, 
these doldrums are no will of mine. I take it 
the gods who own broad heaven are offended. 
Why don’t you tell me—since the gods know everything— 
who has me pinned down here? 
How am I going to make my voyage home?’ 
Now she replied in her immortal beauty: 
‘TIl put it for you clearly as may be, friend. 
The Ancient of the Salt Sea haunts this place, 
immortal Proteus of Egypt; all the deeps 
are known to him; he serves under Poseidon, 
and is, they say, my father. 
If you could take him by surprise and hold him, 
he’d give you course and distance for your sailing 
homeward across the cold fish-breeding sea. 
And should you wish it, noble friend, he’d tell you 
all that occurred at home, both good and evil, 
while you were gone so long and hard a journey.’ 
To this I said: 
‘But you, now—you must tell me 
how I can trap this venerable sea-god. 
He will elude me if he takes alarm; 
no man—god knows—can quell a god with ease.’ 
That fairest of unearthly nymphs replied: 
‘TIl tell you this, too, clearly as may be. 
When the sun hangs at high noon in heaven, 
the Ancient glides ashore under the Westwind, 
hidden by shivering glooms on the clear water, 
and rests in caverns hollowed by the sea. 
There flippered seals, brine children, shining come 
from silvery foam in crowds to lie around him, 
exhaling rankness from the deep sea floor. 
Tomorrow dawn I’ll take you to those caves 
and bed you down there. Choose three officers 
for company—brave men they had better be— 
the old one has strange powers, I must tell you. 
He goes amid the seals to check their number, 
and when he sees them all, and counts them all, 
he lies down like a shepherd with his flock. 
Here is your opportunity: at this point 
gather yourselves, with all your heart and strength, 
and tackle him before he bursts away. 
He'll make you fight—for he can take the forms 
of all the beasts, and water, and blinding fire; 
but you must hold on, even so, and crush him 
until he breaks the silence. When he does, 
he will be in that shape you saw asleep. 
Relax your grip, then, set the Ancient free, 
and put your questions, hero: 
Who is the god so hostile to you, 
and how will you go home on the fish-cold sea.’ 
At this she dove under a swell and left me. 
Back to the ships in the sandy cove I went, 
my heart within me like a high surf running; 
but there I joined my men once more 
at supper, as the sacred Night came on, 
and slept at last beside the lapping water. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose 
I started, by the sea’s wide level ways, 
praying the gods for help, and took along 
three lads I counted on in any fight. 
Meanwhile the nereid swam from the lap of Ocean 
laden with four sealskins, new flayed 
for the hoax she thought of playing on her father. 
In the sand she scooped out hollows for our bodies 
and sat down, waiting. We came close to touch her, 
and, bedding us, she threw the sealskins over us— 
a strong disguise; oh, yes, terribly strong 
as I recall the stench of those damned seals. 
Would any man lie snug with a sea monster? 
But here the nymph, again, came to our rescue, 
dabbing ambrosia under each man’s nose— 
a perfume drowning out the bestial odor. 
So there we lay with beating hearts all morning 
while seals came shoreward out of ripples, jostling 
to take their places, flopping on the sand. 
At noon the Ancient issued from the sea 
and held inspection, counting off the sea-beasts. 
We were the first he numbered; he went by, 
detecting nothing. When at last he slept 
we gave a battlecry and plunged for him, 
locking our hands behind him. But the old one’s 
tricks were not knocked out of him; far from it. 
First he took on a whiskered lion’s shape, 
a serpent then; a leopard; a great boar; 
then sousing water; then a tall green tree. 
Still we hung on, by hook or crook, through everything. 
until the Ancient saw defeat, and grimly 
opened his lips to ask me: 
‘Son of Atreus, 
who counselled you to this? A god: what god? 
Set a trap for me, overpower me—why?’ 
He bit it off, then, and I answered: 
‘Old one, 
you know the reason—why feign not to know? 
High and dry so long upon this island 
I’m at my wits’ end, and my heart is sore. 
You gods know everything; now you can tell me: 
which of the immortals chained me here? 
And how will I get home on the fish-cold sea?’ 
He made reply at once: 
‘You should have paid 
honor to Zeus and the other gods, performing 
a proper sacrifice before embarking: 
that was your short way home on the winedark sea. 
You may not see your friends, your own fine house, 
or enter your own land again, 
unless you first remount the Nile in flood 
and pay your hekatomb to the gods of heaven. 
Then, and then only, 
the gods will grant the passage you desire.’ 
Ah, how my heart sank, hearing this— 
hearing him send me back on the cloudy sea 
in my own track, the long hard way of Egypt. 
Nevertheless, I answered him and said: 
‘Ancient, I shall do all as you command. 
But tell me, now, the others— 
had they a safe return, all those Akhaians 
who stayed behind when Nestor and I left Troy? 
Or were there any lost at sea—what bitterness!— 
any who died in camp, after the war?’ 
To this he said: 
‘For you to know these things 
goes beyond all necessity, Menelaos. 
Why must you ask?—you should not know my mind, 
and you will grieve to learn it, I can tell you. 
Many there were who died, many remain, 
but two high officers alone were lost— 
on the passage home, I mean; you saw the war. 
One is alive, a castaway at sea; 
the other, Aias, perished with all hands— 
though first Poseidon landed him on Gyrai 
promontory, and saved him from the ocean. 
Despite Athena’s hate, he had lived on, 
but the great sinner in his insolence 
yelled that the gods’ will and the sea were beaten, 
and this loud brag came to Poseidon’s ears. 
He swung the trident in his massive hands 
and in one shock from top to bottom split 
that promontory, toppling into the sea 
the fragment where the great fool sat. 
So the vast ocean had its will with Aias, 
drunk in the end on salt spume as he drowned. 
Meanwhile your brother left that doom astern 
in his decked ships—the Lady Hera saved him; 
but as he came round Malea 
a fresh squall caught him, bearing him away 
over the cold sea, groaning in disgust, 
to the Land’s End of Argos, where Thyestés 
lived in the days of old, and then his son, 
Aigisthos. Now, again, return seemed easy: 
the high gods wound the wind into the east, 
and back he sailed, this time to his own coast. 
He went ashore and kissed the earth in joy, 
hot tears blinding his eyes at sight of home. 
But there were eyes that watched him from a height— 
a lookout, paid two bars of gold to keep 
vigil the year round for Aigisthos’ sake, 
that he should be forewarned, and Agamémnon’s 
furious valor sleep unroused. 
Now this man with his news ran to the tyrant, 
who made his crooked arrangements in a flash, 
stationed picked men at arms, a score of men 
in hiding; set a feast in the next room; 
then he went out with chariots and horses 
to hail the king and welcome him to evil. 
He led him in to banquet, all serene, 
and killed him, like an ox felled at the trough; 
and not a man of either company 
survived that ambush in Aigisthos’ house.’ 
Before the end my heart was broken down. 
I slumped on the trampled sand and cried aloud, 
caring no more for life or the light of day, 
and rolled there weeping, till my tears were spent. 
Then the unerring Ancient said at last: 
‘No more, no more; how long must you persist? 
Nothing is gained by grieving so. How soon 
can you return to Argos? You may take him 
alive there still—or else meanwhile Orestes 
will have despatched him. You'll attend the feast.’ 
At this my heart revived, and I recovered 
the self command to question him once more: 
‘Of two companions now I know. The third? 
Tell me his name, the one marooned at sea; 
living, you say, or dead? Even in pain 
I wish to hear.’ 
And this is all he answered: 
‘Laértés’ son, whose home is Ithaka. 
I saw him weeping, weeping on an island. 
The nymph Kalypso has him, in her hall. 
No means of faring home are left him now; 
no ship with oars, and no ship’s company 
to pull him on the broad back of the sea. 
As to your own destiny, prince Menelaos, 
you shall not die in the bluegrass land of Argos; 
rather the gods intend you for Elysion 
with golden Rhadamanthos at the world’s end, 
where all existence is a dream of ease. 
Snowfall is never known there, neither long 
frost of winter, nor torrential rain, 
but only mild and lulling airs from Ocean 
bearing refreshment for the souls of men— 
the West Wind always blowing. 
For the gods 
hold you, as Helen’s lord, a son of Zeus.’ 
At this he dove under a swell and left me, 
and I went back to the ship with my companions, 
feeling my heart’s blood in me running high; 
but in the long hull’s shadow, near the sea, 
we supped again as sacred Night came on 
and slept at last beside the lapping water. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose, 
in first light we launched on the courtly breakers, 
setting up masts and yards in the well-found ships; 
went all on board, and braced on planks athwart 
oarsmen in line dipped oars in the grey sea. 
Soon I drew in to the great stream fed by heaven 
and, laying by, slew bulls in the proper number, 
until the immortal gods were thus appeased; 
then heaped a death mound on that shore against 
all-quenching time for Agamémnon’s honor, 
and put to sea once more. The gods sent down 
a sternwind for a racing passage homeward. 
So ends the story. Now you must stay with me 
and be my guest eleven or twelve days more. 
rll send you on your way with gifts, and fine ones: 
three chariot horses, and a polished car; 
a hammered cup, too, so that all your days, 
tipping the red wine for the deathless gods, 
you will remember me.” 
Telémakhos answered: 
“Lord, son of Atreus, no, you must not keep me. 
Not that a year with you would be too long: 
I never could be homesick here—I find 
your tales and all you say so marvellous. 
But time hangs heavy on my shipmates’ hands 
at holy Pylos, if you make me stay. 
As for your gift, now, let it be some keepsake. 
Horses I cannot take to Ithaka; 
let me bestow them back on you, to serve 
your glory here. My lord, you rule wide country, 
rolling and rich with clover, galingale 
and all the grains: red wheat and hoary barley. 
At home we have no level runs or meadows, 
but highland, goat land—prettier than plains, though. 
Grasses, and pasture land, are hard to come by 
upon the islands tilted in the sea, 
and Ithaka is the island of them all.” 
At this the deep-lunged man of battle smiled. 
Then he said kindly, patting the boy’s hand: 
“You come of good stock, lad. That was well spoken. 
Pll change the gift, then—as indeed I can. 
Let me see what is costliest and most beautiful 
of all the precious things my house contains: 
a wine bowl, mixing bowl, all wrought of silver, 
but rimmed with hammered gold. Let this be yours. 
It is Hephaistos’ work, given me by Phaidimos, 
captain and king of Sidon. He received me 
during my travels. Let it be yours, I say.” 
This was their discourse on that morning. Meanwhile 
guests were arriving at the great lord’s house, 
bringing their sheep, and wine, the ease of men, 
with loaves their comely kerchiefed women sent, 
to make a feast in hall. 
At that same hour, 
before the distant manor of Odysseus, 
the suitors were competing at the discus throw 
and javelin, on a measured field they used, 
arrogant lords at play. The two best men, 
Antinods and Eurymakhos, presided. 
Now Phronios’ son, Noemon, came to see them 
with a question for Antinods. He said: 
“Do any of us know, or not, Antinos, 
what day Telémakhos will be home from Pylos? 
He took my ship, but now I need it back 
to make a cruise to Elis, where the plains are. 
I have a dozen mares at pasture there 
with mule colts yet unweaned. My notion is 
to bring one home and break him in for labor.” 
His first words made them stare—for they knew well 
Telémakhos could not have gone to Pylos, 
but inland with his flocks, or to the swineherd. 
Eupeithes’ son, Antinods, quickly answered: 
“Tell the story straight. He sailed? Who joined him— 
a crew he picked up here in Ithaka, 
or his own slaves? He might have done it that way. 
And will you make it clear 
whether he took the ship against your will? 
Did he ask for it, did you lend it to him?” 
Now said the son of Phronios in reply: 
“Lent it to him, and freely. Who would not, 
when a prince of that house asked for it, in trouble? 
Hard to refuse the favor, it seems to me. 
As for his crew, the best men on the island, 
after ourselves, went with him. Mentor I noted 
going aboard—or a god who looked like Mentor. 
The strange thing is, I saw Lord Mentor here 
in the first light yesterday—although he sailed 
five days ago for Pylos.” 
Turning away, 
Noemon took the path to his father’s house, 
leaving the two men there, baffled and hostile. 
They called the rest in from the playing field 
and made them all sit down, so that Antinods 
could speak out from the stormcloud of his heart, 
swollen with anger; and his eyes blazed: 
“A bad business. Telémakhos had the gall 
to make that crossing, though we said he could not. 
So the young cub rounds up a first rate crew 
in spite of all our crowd, and puts to sea. 
What devilment will he be up to next time?— 
Zeus blast the life out of him before he’s grown! 
Just give me a fast ship and twenty men; 
I'll intercept him, board him in the strait 
between the crags of Same and this island. 
He’ll find his sea adventure after his father 
swamping work in the end!” 
They all cried “Aye!” 
and “After him!” and trailed back to the manor. 
Now not much time went by before Penelope 
learned what was afoot among the suitors. 
Medôn the crier told her. He had been 
outside the wall, and heard them in the court 
conspiring. Into the house and up the stairs 
he ran to her with his news upon his tongue— 
but at the door Penélopé met him, crying: 
“Why have they sent you up here now? To tell 
the maids of King Odysseus—‘Leave your spinning: 
Time to go down and slave to feed those men’? 
I wish this were the last time they came feasting, 
courting me or consorting here! The last! 
Each day you crowd this house like wolves 
to eat away my brave son’s patrimony. 
When you were boys, did your own fathers tell you 
nothing of what Odysseus was for them? 
In word and act impeccable, disinterested 
toward all the realm—though it is king’s justice 
to hold one man abhorred and love another; 
no man alive could say Odysseus wronged him. 
But your own hearts—how different!—and your deeds! 
How soon are benefactions all forgotten!” 
Now Medôn, the alert and cool man, answered: 
“T wish that were the worst of it, my Lady, 
but they intend something more terrible— 
may Zeus forfend and spare us! 
They plan to drive the keen bronze through Telémakhos 
when he comes home. He sailed away, you know, 
to hallowed Pylos and old Lakedaimon 
for news about his father.” 
Her knees failed, 
and her heart failed as she listened to the words, 
and all her power of speech went out of her. 
Tears came; but the rich voice could not come. 
Only after a long while she made answer: 
“Why has my child left me? He had no need 
of those long ships on which men shake out sail 
to tug like horses, breasting miles of sea. 
Why did he go? Must he, too, be forgotten?” 
Then Medn, the perceptive man, replied: 
“A god moved him—who knows?—or his own heart 
sent him to learn, at Pylos, if his father 
roams the wide world still, or what befell him.” 
He left her then, and went down through the house. 
And now the pain around her heart benumbed her; 
chairs were a step away, but far beyond her; 
she sank down on the door sill of the chamber, 
wailing, and all her women young and old 
made a low murmur of lament around her, 
until at last she broke out through her tears: 
“Dearest companions, what has Zeus given me? 
Pain—more pain than any living woman. 
My lord, my lion heart, gone, long ago— 
the bravest man, and best, of the Danaans, 
famous through Hellas and the Argive midlands— 
and now the squalls have blown my son, my dear one, 
an unknown boy, southward. No one told me. 
O brute creatures, not one soul would dare 
to wake me from my sleep; you knew 
the hour he took the black ship out to sea! 
If I had seen that sailing in his eyes 
he should have stayed with me, for all his longing, 
stayed—or left me dead in the great hall. 
Go, someone, now, and call old Dólios, 
the slave my father gave me before I came, 
my orchard keeper—tell him to make haste 
and put these things before Laértés; he 
may plan some kind of action; let him come 
to cry shame on these ruffians who would murder 
Odysseus’ son and heir, and end his line!” 
The dear old nurse, Eurykleia, answered her: 
“Sweet mistress, have my throat cut without mercy 
or what you will; it’s true, I won’t conceal it, 
I knew the whole thing; gave him his provisions; 
grain and sweet wine I gave, and a great oath 
to tell you nothing till twelve days went by, 
or till you heard of it yourself, or missed him; 
he hoped you would not tear your skin lamenting. 
Come, bathe and dress your loveliness afresh, 
and go to the upper rooms with all your maids 
to ask help from Athena, Zeus’s daughter. 
She it will be who saves this boy from death. 
Spare the old man this further suffering; 
the blissful gods cannot so hate his line, 
heirs of Arkésios; one will yet again 
be lord of the tall house and the far fields.” 
She hushed her weeping in this way, and soothed her. 
The Lady Penelope arose and bathed, 
dressing her body in her freshest linen, 
filled a basket with barley, and led her maids 
to the upper rooms, where she besought Athena: 
“Tireless child of Zeus, graciously hear me! 
If ever Odysseus burned at our altar fire 
thighbones of beef or mutton in sacrifice, 
remember it for my sake! Save my son! 
Shield him, and make the killers go astray!” 
She ended with a cry, and the goddess heard her. 
Now voices rose from the shadowy hall below 
where the suitors were assuring one another: 
“Our so-long-courted Queen is even now 
of a mind to marry one of us, and knows 
nothing of what is destined for her son.” 
Of what was destined they in fact knew nothing, 
but Antinods addressed them in a whisper: 
“No boasting—are you mad?—and no loud talk: 
someone might hear it and alarm the house. 
Come along now, be quiet, this way; come, 
we'll carry out the plan our hearts are set on.” 
Picking out twenty of the strongest seamen, 
he led them to a ship at the sea’s edge, 
and down they dragged her into deeper water, 
stepping a mast in her, with furled sails, 
and oars a-trail from thongs looped over thole pins, 
ready all; then tried the white sail, hoisting, 
while men at arms carried their gear aboard. 
They moored the ship some way off shore, and left her 
to take their evening meal there, waiting for night to come. 
Penelope at that hour in her high chamber 
lay silent, tasting neither food nor drink, 
and thought of nothing but her princely son— 
could he escape, or would they find and kill him?— 
her mind turning at bay, like a cornered lion 
in whom fear comes as hunters close the ring. 
But in her sick thought sweet sleep overtook her, 
and she dozed off, her body slack and still. 
Now it occurred to the grey-eyed goddess Athena 
to make a figure of dream in a woman’s form— 
Iphthime, great Ikarios’ other daughter, 
whom Eumelos of Pherai took as bride. 
The goddess sent this dream to Odysseus’ house 
to quiet Penélopé and end her grieving. 
So, passing by the strap-slit through the door, 
the image came a-gliding down the room 
to stand at her bedside and murmur to her: 
“Sleepest thou, sorrowing Penélopé? 
The gods whose life is ease no longer suffer thee 
to pine and weep, then; he returns unharmed, 
thy little one; no way hath he offended.” 
Then pensive Penélopé made this reply, 
slumbering sweetly in the gates of dream: 
“Sister, hast thou come hither? Why? Aforetime 
never wouldst come, so far away thy dwelling. 
And am I bid be done with all my grieving? 
But see what anguish hath my heart and soul! 
My lord, my lion heart, gone, long ago— 
the bravest man, and best, of the Danaans, 
famous through Hellas and the Argive midlands— 
and now my son, my dear one, gone seafaring, 
a child, untrained in hardship or in council. 
Aye, ’tis for him I weep, more than his father! 
Aye, how I tremble for him, lest some blow 
befall him at men’s hands or on the sea! 
Cruel are they and many who plot against him, 
to take his life before he can return.” 
Now the dim phantom spoke to her once more: 
“Lift up thy heart, and fear not overmuch. 
For by his side one goes whom all men else 
invoke as their defender, one so powerful— 
Pallas Athena; in thy tears she pitied thee 
and now hath sent me that I so assure thee.” 
Then said Penélopé the wise: 
“Tf thou art 
numinous and hast ears for divine speech, 
O tell me, what of Odysseus, man of woe? 
Is he alive still somewhere, seeth he day light still? 
Or gone in death to the sunless underworld?” 
The dim phantom said only this in answer: 
“Of him I may not tell thee in this discourse, 
alive or dead. And empty words are evil.” 
The wavering form withdrew along the doorbolt 
into a draft of wind, and out of sleep 
Penélopé awoke, in better heart 
for that clear dream in the twilight of the night. 
Meanwhile the suitors had got under way, 
planning the death plunge for Telémakhos. 
Between the Isles of Ithaka and Same 
the sea is broken by an islet, Asteris, 
with access to both channels from a cove. 
In ambush here that night the Akhaians lay. 


BOOK 5

Dawn came up from the couch of her reclining, 
leaving her lord Tithonos’ brilliant side 
with fresh light in her arms for gods and men. 
And the master of heaven and high thunder, Zeus, 
went to his place among the gods assembled 
hearing Athena tell Odysseus’ woe. 
For she, being vexed that he was still sojourning 
in the sea chambers of Kalypso, said: 
“O Father Zeus and gods in bliss forever, 
let no man holding scepter as a king 
think to be mild, or kind, or virtuous; 
let him be cruel, and practice evil ways, 
for those Odysseus ruled cannot remember 
the fatherhood and mercy of his reign. 
Meanwhile he lives and grieves upon that island 
in thralldom to the nymph; he cannot stir, 
cannot fare homeward, for no ship is left him, 
fitted with oars—no crewmen or companions 
to pull him on the broad back of the sea. 
And now murder is hatched on the high sea 
against his son, who sought news of his father 
in the holy lands of Pylos and Lakedaimon.” 
To this the summoner of cloud replied: 
“My child, what odd complaints you let escape you. 
Have you not, you yourself, arranged this matter— 
as we all know—so that Odysseus 
will bring these men to book, on his return? 
And are you not the one to give Telémakhos 
a safe route for sailing? Let his enemies 
encounter no one and row home again.” 
He turned then to his favorite son and said: 
“Hermes, you have much practice on our missions, 
go make it known to the softly-braided nymph 
that we, whose will is not subject to error, 
order Odysseus home; let him depart. 
But let him have no company, gods or men, 
only a raft that he must lash together, 
and after twenty days, worn out at sea, 
he shall make land upon the garden isle, 
Skheria, of our kinsmen, the Phaiakians. 
Let these men take him to their hearts in honor 
and berth him in a ship, and send him home, 
with gifts of garments, gold, and bronze— 
so much he had not counted on from Troy 
could he have carried home his share of plunder. 
His destiny is to see his friends again 
under his own roof, in his father’s country.” 
No words were lost on Hermés the Wayfinder, 
who bent to tie his beautiful sandals on, 
ambrosial, golden, that carry him over water 
or over endless land in a swish of the wind, 
and took the wand with which he charms asleep— 
or when he wills, awake—the eyes of men. 
So wand in hand he paced into the air, 
shot from Pieria down, down to sea level, 
and veered to skim the swell. A gull patrolling 
between the wave crests of the desolate sea 
will dip to catch a fish, and douse his wings; 
no higher above the whitecaps Hermés flew 
until the distant island lay ahead, 
then rising shoreward from the violet ocean 
he stepped up to the cave. Divine Kalypso, 
the mistress of the isle, was now at home. 
Upon her hearthstone a great fire blazing 
scented the farthest shores with cedar smoke 
and smoke of thyme, and singing high and low 
in her sweet voice, before her loom a-weaving, 
she passed her golden shuttle to and fro. 
A deep wood grew outside, with summer leaves 
of alder and black poplar, pungent cypress. 
Ornate birds here rested their stretched wings— 
horned owls, falcons, cormorants—long-tongued 
beachcombing birds, and followers of the sea. 
Around the smoothwalled cave a crooking vine 
held purple clusters under ply of green; 
and four springs, bubbling up near one another 
shallow and clear, took channels here and there 
through beds of violets and tender parsley. 
Even a god who found this place 
would gaze, and feel his heart beat with delight: 
so Hermes did; but when he had gazed his fill 
he entered the wide cave. Now face to face 
the magical Kalypso recognized him, 
as all immortal gods know one another 
on sight—though seeming strangers, far from home. 
But he saw nothing of the great Odysseus, 
who sat apart, as a thousand times before, 
and racked his own heart groaning, with eyes wet 
scanning the bare horizon of the sea. 
Kalypso, lovely nymph, seated her guest 
in a bright chair all shimmering, and asked: 
“O Hermés, ever with your golden wand, 
what brings you to my island? 
Your awesome visits in the past were few. 
Now tell me what request you have in mind; 
for I desire to do it, if I can, 
and if it is a proper thing to do. 
But wait a while, and let me serve my friend.” 
She drew a table of ambrosia near him 
and stirred a cup of ruby-colored nectar— 
food and drink for the luminous Wayfinder, 
who took both at his leisure, and replied: 
“Goddess to god, you greet me, questioning me? 
Well, here is truth for you in courtesy. 
Zeus made me come, and not my inclination; 
who cares to cross that tract of desolation, 
the bitter sea, all mortal towns behind 
where gods have beef and honors from mankind? 
But it is not to be thought of—and no use— 
for any god to elude the will of Zeus. 
He notes your friend, most ill-starred by renown 
of all the peers who fought for Priam’s town— 
nine years of war they had, before great Troy was down. 
Homing, they wronged the goddess with grey eyes, 
who made a black wind blow and the seas rise, 
in which his troops were lost, and all his gear, 
while easterlies and current washed him here. 
Now the command is: send him back in haste. 
His life may not in exile go to waste. 
His destiny, his homecoming, is at hand, 
when he shall see his dearest, and walk on his own land.” 
That goddess most divinely made 
shuddered before him, and her warm voice rose: 
“Oh you vile gods, in jealousy supernal! 
You hate it when we choose to lie with men— 
immortal flesh by some dear mortal side. 
So radiant Dawn once took to bed Orion 
until you easeful gods grew peevish at it, 
and holy Artemis, Artemis throned in gold, 
hunted him down in Delos with her arrows. 
Then Demeter of the tasseled tresses yielded 
to Iasion, mingling and making love 
in a furrow three times plowed; but Zeus found out 
and killed him with a white-hot thunderbolt. 
So now you grudge me, too, my mortal friend. 
But it was I who saved him—saw him straddle 
his own keel board, the one man left afloat 
when Zeus rent wide his ship with chain lightning 
and overturned him in the winedark sea. 
Then all his troops were lost, his good companions, 
but wind and current washed him here to me. 
I fed him, loved him, sang that he should not die 
nor grow old, ever, in all the days to come. 
But now there’s no eluding Zeus’s will. 
If this thing be ordained by him, I say 
so be it, let the man strike out alone 
on the vast water. Surely I cannot ‘send’ him. 
I have no long-oared ships, no company 
to pull him on the broad back of the sea. 
My counsel he shall have, and nothing hidden, 
to help him homeward without harm.” 
To this the Way finder made answer briefly: 
“Thus you shall send him, then. And show more grace 
in your obedience, or be chastised by Zeus.” 
The strong god glittering left her as he spoke, 
and now her ladyship, having given heed 
to Zeus’s mandate, went to find Odysseus 
in his stone seat to seaward—tear on tear 
brimming his eyes. The sweet days of his life time 
were running out in anguish over his exile, 
for long ago the nymph had ceased to please. 
Though he fought shy of her and her desire, 
he lay with her each night, for she compelled him. 
But when day came he sat on the rocky shore 
and broke his own heart groaning, with eyes wet 
scanning the bare horizon of the sea. 
Now she stood near him in her beauty, saying: 
“O forlorn man, be still. 
Here you need grieve no more; you need not feel 
your life consumed here; I have pondered it, 
and I shall help you go. 
Come and cut down high timber for a raft 
or flatboat; make her broad-beamed, and decked over, 
so you can ride her on the misty sea. 
Stores I shall put aboard for you—bread, water, 
and ruby-colored wine, to stay your hunger— 
give you a seacloak and a following wind 
to help you homeward without harm—provided 
the gods who rule wide heaven wish it so. 
Stronger than I they are, in mind and power.” 
For all he had endured, Odysseus shuddered. 
But when he spoke, his words went to the mark: 
“After these years, a helping hand? O goddess, 
what guile is hidden here? 
A raft, you say, to cross the Western Ocean, 
rough water, and unknown? Seaworthy ships 
that glory in god’s wind will never cross it. 
I take no raft you grudge me out to sea. 
Or yield me first a great oath, if I do, 
to work no more enchantment to my harm.” 
At this the beautiful nymph Kalypso smiled 
and answered sweetly, laying her hand upon him: 
“What a dog you are! And not for nothing learned, 
having the wit to ask this thing of me! 
My witness then be earth and sky 
and dripping Styx that I swear by— 
the gay gods cannot swear more seriously— 
I have no further spells to work against you. 
But what I shall devise, and what I tell you, 
will be the same as if your need were mine. 
Fairness is all I think of. There are hearts 
made of cold iron—but my heart is kind.” 
Swiftly she turned and led him to her cave, 
and they went in, the mortal and immortal. 
He took the chair left empty now by Hermes, 
where the divine Kalypso placed before him 
victuals and drink of men; then she sat down 
facing Odysseus, while her serving maids 
brought nectar and ambrosia to her side. 
Then each one’s hands went out on each one’s feast 
until they had had their pleasure; and she said: 
“Son of Laértés, versatile Odysseus, 
after these years with me, you still desire 
your old home? Even so, I wish you well. 
If you could see it all, before you go— 
all the adversity you face at sea— 
you would stay here, and guard this house, and be 
immortal—though you wanted her forever, 
that bride for whom you pine each day. 
Can I be less desirable than she is? 
Less interesting? Less beautiful? Can mortals 
compare with goddesses in grace and form?” 
To this the strategist Odysseus answered: 
“My lady goddess, here is no cause for anger. 
My quiet Penélopé—how well I know— 
would seem a shade before your majesty, 
death and old age being unknown to you, 
while she must die. Yet, it is true, each day 
I long for home, long for the sight of home. 
If any god has marked me out again 
for shipwreck, my tough heart can undergo it. 
What hardship have I not long since endured 
at sea, in battle! Let the trial come.” 
Now as he spoke the sun set, dusk drew on, 
and they retired, this pair, to the inner cave 
to revel and rest softly, side by side. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose 
Odysseus pulled his tunic and his cloak on, 
while the sea nymph dressed in a silvery gown 
of subtle tissue, drew about her waist 
a golden belt, and veiled her head, and then 
took thought for the great-hearted hero’s voyage. 
A brazen axehead first she had to give him, 
two-bladed, and agreeable to the palm 
with a smooth-fitting haft of olive wood; 
next a well-polished adze; and then she led him 
to the island’s tip where bigger timber grew— 
besides the alder and poplar, tall pine trees, 
long dead and seasoned, that would float him high. 
Showing him in that place her stand of timber 
the loveliest of nymphs took her way home. 
Now the man fell to chopping; when he paused 
twenty tall trees were down. He lopped the branches, 
split the trunks, and trimmed his puncheons true. 
Meanwhile Kalypso brought him an auger tool 
with which he drilled through all his planks, then drove 
stout pins to bolt them, fitted side by side. 
A master shipwright, building a cargo vessel, 
lays down a broad and shallow hull; just so 
Odysseus shaped the bottom of his craft. 
He made his decking fast to close-set ribs 
before he closed the side with longer planking, 
then cut a mast pole, and a proper yard, 
and shaped a steering oar to hold her steady. 
He drove long strands of willow in all the seams 
to keep out waves, and ballasted with logs. 
As for a sail, the lovely nymph Kalypso 
brought him a cloth so he could make that, too. 
Then he ran up his rigging—halyards, braces— 
and hauled the boat on rollers to the water. 
This was the fourth day, when he had all ready; 
on the fifth day, she sent him out to sea. 
But first she bathed him, gave him a scented cloak, 
and put on board a skin of dusky wine 
with water in a bigger skin, and stores— 
boiled meats and other victuals—in a bag. 
Then she conjured a warm landbreeze to blowing— 
joy for Odysseus when he shook out sail! 
Now the great seaman, leaning on his oar, 
steered all the night unsleeping, and his eyes 
picked out the Pleiades, the laggard Ploughman, 
and the Great Bear, that some have called the Wain, 
pivoting in the sky before Orion; 
of all the night’s pure figures, she alone 
would never bathe or dip in the Ocean stream. 
These stars the beautiful Kalypso bade him 
hold on his left hand as he crossed the main. 
Seventeen nights and days in the open water 
he sailed, before a dark shoreline appeared; 
Skheria then came slowly into view 
like a rough shield of bull’s hide on the sea. 
But now the god of earthquake, storming home 
over the mountains of Asia from the Sunburned land, 
sighted him far away. The god grew sullen 
and tossed his great head, muttering to himself: 
“Here is a pretty cruise! While I was gone 
the gods have changed their minds about Odysseus. 
Look at him now, just offshore of that island 
that frees him from the bondage of his exile! 
Still I can give him a rough ride in, and will.” 
Brewing high thunderheads, he churned the deep 
with both hands on his trident—called up wind 
from every quarter, and sent a wall of rain 
to blot out land and sea in torrential night. 
Hurricane winds now struck from the South and East 
shifting North West in a great spume of seas, 
on which Odysseus’ knees grew slack, his heart 
sickened, and he said within himself: 
“Rag of man that I am, is this the end of me? 
I fear the goddess told it all too well— 
predicting great adversity at sea 
and far from home. Now all things bear her out: 
the whole rondure of heaven hooded so 
by Zeus in woeful cloud, and the sea raging 
under such winds. I am going down, that’s sure. 
How lucky those Danaans were who perished 
on Troy’s wide seaboard, serving the Atreidai! 
Would God I, too, had died there—met my end 
that time the Trojans made so many casts at me 
when I stood by Akhilleus after death. ’ 
I should have had a soldier’s burial 
and praise from the Akhaians—not this choking 
waiting for me at sea, unmarked and lonely.” 
A great wave drove at him with toppling crest 
spinning him round, in one tremendous blow, 
and he went plunging overboard, the oar-haft 
wrenched from his grip. A gust that came on howling 
at the same instant broke his mast in two, 
hurling his yard and sail far out to leeward. 
Now the big wave a long time kept him under, 
helpless to surface, held by tons of water, 
tangled, too, by the seacloak of Kalypso. 
Long, long, until he came up spouting brine, 
with streamlets gushing from his head and beard; 
but still bethought him, half-drowned as he was, 
to flounder for the boat and get a handhold 
into the bilge—to crouch there, foiling death. 
Across the foaming water, to and fro, 
the boat careered like a ball of tumbleweed 
blown on the autumn plains, but intact still. 
So the winds drove this wreck over the deep, 
East Wind and North Wind, then South Wind and West, 
coursing each in turn to the brutal harry. 
But Ino saw him—Ino, Kadmos’ daughter, 
slim-legged, lovely, once an earthling girl, 
now in the seas a nereid, Leukothea. 
Touched by Odysseus’ painful buffeting 
she broke the surface, like a diving bird, 
to rest upon the tossing raft and say: 
“O forlorn man, I wonder 
why the Earthshaker, Lord Poseidon, holds 
this fearful grudge—father of all your woes. 
He will not drown you, though, despite his rage. 
You seem clear-headed still; do what I tell you. 
Shed that cloak, let the gale take your craft, 
and swim for it—swim hard to get ashore 
upon Skheria, yonder, 
where it is fated that you find a shelter. 
Here: make my veil your sash; it is not mortal; 
you cannot, now, be drowned or suffer harm. 
Only, the instant you lay hold of earth, 
discard it, cast it far, far out from shore 
in the winedark sea again, and turn away.” 
After she had bestowed her veil, the nereid 
dove like a gull to windward 
where a dark waveside closed over her whiteness. 
But in perplexity Odysseus 
said to himself, his great heart laboring: 
“O damned confusion! Can this be a ruse 
to trick me from the boat for some god’s pleasure? 
No I'll not swim; with my own eyes I saw 
how far the land lies that she called my shelter. 
Better to do the wise thing, as I see it. 
While this poor planking holds, I stay aboard; 
I may ride out the pounding of the storm, 
or if she cracks up, take to the water then; 
I cannot think it through a better way.” 
But even while he pondered and decided, 
the god of earthquake heaved a wave against him 
high as a rooftree and of awful gloom. 
A gust of wind, hitting a pile of chaff, 
will scatter all the parched stuff far and wide; 
just so, when this gigantic billow struck 
the boat’s big timbers flew apart. Odysseus 
clung to a single beam, like a jockey riding, 
meanwhile stripping Kalypso’s cloak away; 
then he slung round his chest the veil of Ino 
and plunged headfirst into the sea. His hands 
went out to stroke, and he gave a swimmer’s kick. 
But the strong Earthshaker had him under his eye, 
and nodded as he said: 
“Go on, go on; 
wander the high seas this way, take your blows, 
before you join that race the gods have nurtured. 
Nor will you grumble, even then, I think, 
for want of trouble.” 
Whipping his glossy team 
he rode off to his glorious home at Aigai. 
But Zeus’s daughter Athena countered him: 
she checked the course of all the winds but one, 
commanding them, “Be quiet and go to sleep.” 
Then sent a long swell running under a norther 
to bear the prince Odysseus, back from danger, 
to join the Phaiakians, people of the sea. 
Two nights, two days, in the solid deep-sea swell 
he drifted, many times awaiting death, 
until with shining ringlets in the East 
the dawn confirmed a third day, breaking clear 
over a high and windless sea; and mounting 
a rolling wave he caught a glimpse of land. 
What a dear welcome thing life seems to children 
whose father, in the extremity, recovers 
after some weakening and malignant illness: 
his pangs are gone, the gods have delivered him. 
So dear and welcome to Odysseus 
the sight of land, of woodland, on that morning. 
It made him swim again, to get a foothold 
on solid ground. But when he came in earshot 
he heard the trampling roar of sea on rock, 
where combers, rising shoreward, thudded down 
on the sucking ebb—all sheeted with salt foam. 
Here were no coves or harborage or shelter, 
only steep headlands, rockfallen reefs and crags. 
Odysseus’ knees grew slack, his heart faint, 
a heaviness came over him, and he said: 
“A cruel turn, this. Never had I thought 
to see this land, but Zeus has let me see it— 
and let me, too, traverse the Western Ocean— 
only to find no exit from these breakers. 
Here are sharp rocks off shore, and the sea a smother 
rushing around them; rock face rising sheer 
from deep water; nowhere could I stand up 
on my two feet and fight free of the welter. 
No matter how I try it, the surf may throw me 
against the cliffside; no good fighting there. 
If I swim down the coast, outside the breakers, 
I may find shelving shore and quiet water— 
but what if another gale comes on to blow? 
Then I go cursing out to sea once more. 
Or then again, some shark of Amphitrité’s 
may hunt me, sent by the genius of the deep. 
I know how he who makes earth tremble hates me.” 
During this meditation a heavy surge 
was taking him, in fact, straight on the rocks. 
He had been flayed there, and his bones broken, 
had not grey-eyed Athena instructed him: 
he gripped a rock-ledge with both hands in passing 
and held on, groaning, as the surge went by, 
to keep clear of its breaking. Then the backwash 
hit him, ripping him under and far out. 
An octopus, when you drag one from his chamber, 
comes up with suckers full of tiny stones: 
Odysseus left the skin of his great hands 
torn on that rock-ledge as the wave submerged him. 
And now at last Odysseus would have perished, 
battered inhumanly, but he had the gift 
of self-possession from grey-eyed Athena. 
So, when the backwash spewed him up again, 
he swam out and along, and scanned the coast 
for some landspit that made a breakwater. 
Lo and behold, the mouth of a calm river 
at length came into view, with level shores 
unbroken, free from rock, shielded from wind— 
by far the best place he had found. 
But as he felt the current flowing seaward 
he prayed in his heart: 
“O hear me, lord of the stream: 
how sorely I depend upon your mercy! 
derelict as I am by the sea’s anger. 
Is he not sacred, even to the gods, 
the wandering man who comes, as I have come, 
in weariness before your knees, your waters? 
Here is your servant; lord, have mercy on me.” 
Now even as he prayed the tide at ebb 
had turned, and the river god made quiet water, 
drawing him in to safety in the shallows. 
His knees buckled, his arms gave way beneath him, 
all vital force now conquered by the sea. 
Swollen from head to foot he was, and seawater 
gushed from his mouth and nostrils. There he lay, 
scarce drawing breath, unstirring, deathly spent. 
In time, as air came back into his lungs 
and warmth around his heart, he loosed the veil, 
letting it drift away on the estuary 
downstream to where a white wave took it under 
and Ino’s hands received it. Then the man 
crawled to the river bank among the reeds 
where, face down, he could kiss the soil of earth, 
in his exhaustion murmuring to himself: 
“What more can this hulk suffer? What comes now? 
In vigil through the night here by the river 
how can I not succumb, being weak and sick, 
to the night’s damp and hoarfrost of the morning? 
The air comes cold from rivers before dawn. 
But if I climb the slope and fall asleep 
in the dark forest’s undergrowth—supposing 
cold and fatigue will go, and sweet sleep come— 
I fear I make the wild beasts easy prey.” 
But this seemed best to him, as he thought it over. 
He made his way to a grove above the water 
on open ground, and crept under twin bushes 
grown from the same spot—olive and wild olive— 
a thicket proof against the stinging wind 
or Sun’s blaze, fine soever the needling sunlight; 
nor could a downpour wet it through, so dense 
those plants were interwoven. Here Odysseus 
tunnelled, and raked together with his hands 
a wide bed—for a fall of leaves was there, 
enough to save two men or maybe three 
on a winter night, a night of bitter cold. 
Odysseus’ heart laughed when he saw his leaf-bed, 
and down he lay, heaping more leaves above him. 
A man in a distant field, no hearthfires near, 
will hide a fresh brand in his bed of embers 
to keep a spark alive for the next day; 
so in the leaves Odysseus hid himself, 
while over him Athena showered sleep 
that his distress should end, and soon, soon. 
In quiet sleep she sealed his cherished eyes. 


BOOK 6

Far gone in weariness, in oblivion, 
the noble and enduring man slept on; 
but Athena in the night went down the land 
of the Phaiakians, entering their city. 
In days gone by, these men held Hypereia, 
a country of wide dancing grounds, but near them 
were overbearing Kyklopés, whose power 
could not be turned from pillage. So the Phaidkians 
migrated thence under Nausithoos 
to settle a New World across the sea, 
Skheria Island. That first captain walled 
their promontory, built their homes and shrines, 
and parcelled out the black land for the plow. 
But he had gone down long ago to Death. 
Alkinoés ruled, and Heaven gave him wisdom, 
so on this night the goddess, grey-eyed Athena, 
entered the palace of Alkinods 
to make sure of Odysseus’ voyage home. 
She took her way to a painted bedchamber 
where a young girl lay fast asleep—so fine 
in mould and feature that she seemed a goddess— 
the daughter of Alkinods, Nausikaa. 
On either side, as Graces might have slept, 
her maids were sleeping. The bright doors were shut, 
but like a sudden stir of wind, Athena 
moved to the bedside of the girl, and grew 
visible as the shipman Dymas’ daughter, 
a girl the princess’ age, and her dear friend. 
In this form grey-eyed Athena said to her: 
“How so remiss, and yet thy mother’s daughter? 
leaving thy clothes uncared for, Nausikaa, 
when soon thou must have store of marriage linen, 
and put thy minstrelsy in wedding dress! 
Beauty, in these, will make the folk admire, 
and bring thy father and gentle mother joy. 
Let us go washing in the shine of morning! 
Beside thee will I drub, so wedding chests 
will brim by evening. Maidenhood must end! 
Have not the noblest born Phaiakians 
paid court to thee, whose birth none can excel? 
Go beg thy sovereign father, even at dawn, 
to have the mule cart and the mules brought round 
to take thy body-linen, gowns and mantles. 
Thou shouldst ride, for it becomes thee more, 
the washing pools are found so far from home.” 
On this word she departed, grey-eyed Athena, 
to where the gods have their eternal dwelling— 
as men say—in the fastness of Olympos. 
Never a tremor of wind, or a splash of rain, 
no errant snowflake comes to stain that heaven, 
so calm, so vaporless, the world of light. 
Here, where the gay gods live their days of pleasure, 
the grey-eyed one withdrew, leaving the princess. 
And now Dawn took her own fair throne, awaking 
the girl in the sweet gown, still charmed by dream. 
Down through the rooms she went to tell her parents, 
whom she found still at home: her mother seated 
near the great hearth among her maids—and twirling 
out of her distaff yarn dyed like the sea—; 
her father at the door, bound for a council 
of princes on petition of the gentry. 
She went up close to him and softly said: 
“My dear Papa, could you not send the mule cart 
around for me—the gig with pretty wheels? 
I must take all our things and get them washed 
at the river pools; our linen is all soiled. 
And you should wear fresh clothing, going to council 
with counselors and first men of the realm. 
Remember your five sons at home: though two 
are married, we have still three bachelor sprigs; 
they will have none but laundered clothes each time 
they go to the dancing. See what I must think of!” 
She had no word to say of her own wedding, 
though her keen father saw her blush. Said he: 
“No mules would I deny you, child, nor anything. 
Go along, now; the grooms will bring your gig 
with pretty wheels and the cargo box upon it.” 
He spoke to the stableman, who soon brought round 
the cart, low-wheeled and nimble; 
harnessed the mules, and backed them in the traces. 
Meanwhile the girl fetched all her soiled apparel 
to bundle in the polished wagon box. 
Her mother, for their luncheon, packed a hamper 
with picnic fare, and filled a skin of wine, 
and, when the princess had been handed up, 
gave her a golden bottle of olive oil 
for softening girls’ bodies, after bathing. 
Nausikaa took the reins and raised her whip, 
lashing the mules. What jingling! What a clatter! 
But off they went in a ground-covering trot, 
with princess, maids, and laundry drawn behind. 
By the lower river where the wagon came 
were washing pools, with water all year flowing 
in limpid spillways that no grime withstood. 
The girls unhitched the mules, and sent them down 
along the eddying stream to crop sweet grass. 
Then sliding out the cart’s tail board, they took 
armloads of clothing to the dusky water, 
and trod them in the pits, making a race of it. 
All being drubbed, all blemish rinsed away, 
they spread them, piece by piece, along the beach 
whose pebbles had been laundered by the sea; 
then took a dip themselves, and, all anointed 
with golden oil, ate lunch beside the river 
while the bright burning sun dried out their linen. 
Princess and maids delighted in that feast; 
then, putting off their veils, 
they ran and passed a ball to a rhythmic beat, 
Nausikaa flashing first with her white arms. 
So Artemis goes flying after her arrows flown 
down some tremendous valley-side— 
Taygetos, Erymanthos— 
chasing the mountain goats or ghosting deer, 
with nymphs of the wild places flanking her; 
and Leto’s heart delights to see them running, 
for, taller by a head than nymphs can be, 
the goddess shows more stately, all being beautiful. 
So one could tell the princess from the maids. 
Soon it was time, she knew, for riding homeward— 
mules to be harnessed, linen folded smooth— 
but the grey-eyed goddess Athena made her tarry, 
so that Odysseus might behold her beauty 
and win her guidance to the town. 
It happened 
when the king’s daughter threw her ball off line 
and missed, and put it in the whirling stream,— 
at which they all gave such a shout, Odysseus 
awoke and sat up, saying to himself: 
“Now, by my life, mankind again! But who? 
Savages, are they, strangers to courtesy? 
Or gentle folk, who know and fear the gods? 
That was a lusty cry of tall young girls— 
most like the cry of nymphs, who haunt the peaks, 
and springs of brooks, and inland grassy places. 
Or am I amid people of human speech? 
Up again, man; and let me see for myself.” 
He pushed aside the bushes, breaking off 
with his great hand a single branch of olive, 
whose leaves might shield him in his nakedness; 
so came out rustling, like a mountain lion, 
rain-drenched, wind-buffeted, but in his might at ease, 
with burning eyes—who prowls among the herds 
or flocks, or after game, his hungry belly 
taking him near stout homesteads for his prey. 
Odysseus had this look, in his rough skin 
advancing on the girls with pretty braids; 
and he was driven on by hunger, too. 
Streaked with brine, and swollen, he terrified them, 
so that they fled, this way and that. Only 
Alkínoös’ daughter stood her ground, being given 
a bold heart by Athena, and steady knees. 
She faced him, waiting. And Odysseus came, 
debating inwardly what he should do: 
embrace this beauty’s knees in supplication? 
or stand apart, and, using honeyed speech, 
inquire the way to town, and beg some clothing? 
In his swift reckoning, he thought it best 
to trust in words to please her—and keep away; 
he might anger the girl, touching her knees. 
So he began, and let the soft words fall: 
“Mistress: please: are you divine, or mortal? 
If one of those who dwell in the wide heaven, 
you are most near to Artemis, I should say— 
great Zeus’s daughter—in your grace and presence. 
If you are one of earth’s inhabitants, 
how blest your father, and your gentle mother, 
blest all your kin. I know what happiness 
must send the warm tears to their eyes, each time 
they see their wondrous child go to the dancing! 
But one man’s destiny is more than blest— 
he who prevails, and takes you as his bride. 
Never have I laid eyes on equal beauty 
in man or woman. I am hushed indeed. 
So fair, one time, I thought a young palm tree 
at Delos near the altar of Apollo— 
I had troops under me when I was there 
on the sea route that later brought me grief— 
but that slim palm tree filled my heart with wonder: 
never came shoot from earth so beautiful. 
So now, my lady, I stand in awe so great 
I cannot take your knees. And yet my case is desperate: 
twenty days, yesterday, in the winedark sea, 
on the ever-lunging swell, under gale winds, 
getting away from the Island of Ogygia. 
And now the terror of Storm has left me stranded 
upon this shore—with more blows yet to suffer, 
I must believe, before the gods relent. 
Mistress, do me a kindness! 
After much weary toil, I come to you, 
and you are the first soul I have seen—I know 
no others here. Direct me to the town, 
give me a rag that I can throw around me, 
some cloth or wrapping that you brought along. 
And may the gods accomplish your desire: 
a home, a husband, and harmonious 
converse with him—the best thing in the world 
being a strong house held in serenity 
where man and wife agree. Woe to their enemies, 
joy to their friends! But all this they know best.” 
Then she of the white arms, Nausikaa, replied: 
“Stranger, there is no quirk or evil in you 
that I can see. You know Zeus metes out fortune 
to good and bad men as it pleases him. 
Hardship he sent to you, and you must bear it. 
But now that you have taken refuge here 
you shall not lack for clothing, or any other 
comfort due to a poor man in distress. 
The town lies this way, and the men are called 
Phaiakians, who own the land and city. 
I am daughter to the Prince Alkinods, 
by whom the power of our people stands.” 
Turning, she called out to her maids-in-waiting: 
“Stay with me! Does the sight of a man scare you? 
Or do you take this one for an enemy? 
Why, there’s no fool so brash, and never will be, 
as to bring war or pillage to this coast, 
for we are dear to the immortal gods, 
living here, in the sea that rolls forever, 
distant from other lands and other men. 
No: this man is a castaway, poor fellow; 
we must take care of him. Strangers and beggars 
come from Zeus: a small gift, then, is friendly. 
Give our new guest some food and drink, and take him 
into the river, out of the wind, to bathe.” 
They stood up now, and called to one another 
to go on back. Quite soon they led Odysseus 
under the river bank, as they were bidden; 
and there laid out a tunic, and a cloak, 
and gave him olive oil in the golden flask. 
“Here,” they said, “go bathe in the flowing water.” 
But heard now from that kingly man, Odysseus: 
“Maids,” he said, “keep away a little; let me 
wash the brine from my own back, and rub on 
plenty of oil. It is long since my anointing. 
I take no bath, however, where you can see me— 
naked before young girls with pretty braids.” 
They left him, then, and went to tell the princess. 
And now Odysseus, dousing in the river, 
scrubbed the coat of brine from back and shoulders 
and rinsed the clot of sea-spume from his hair; 
got himself all rubbed down, from head to foot, 
then he put on the clothes the princess gave him. 
Athena lent a hand, making him seem 
taller, and massive too, with crisping hair 
in curls like petals of wild hyacinth, 
but all red-golden. Think of gold infused 
on silver by a craftsman, whose fine art 
Hephaistos taught him, or Athena: one 
whose work moves to delight: just so she lavished 
beauty over Odysseus’ head and shoulders. 
Then he went down to sit on the sea beach 
in his new splendor. There the girl regarded him, 
and after a time she said to the maids beside her: 
“My gentlewomen, I have a thing to tell you. 
The Olympian gods cannot be all averse 
to this man’s coming here among our islanders. 
Uncouth he seemed, I thought so, too, before; 
but now he looks like one of heaven’s people. 
I wish my husband could be fine as he 
and glad to stay forever on Skheria! 
But have you given refreshment to our guest?” 
At this the maids, all gravely listening, hastened 
to set out bread and wine before Odysseus, 
and ah! how ravenously that patient man 
took food and drink, his long fast at an end. 
The princess Nausikaa now turned aside 
to fold her linens; in the pretty cart 
she stowed them, put the mule team under harness, 
mounted the driver’s seat, and then looked down 
to say with cheerful prompting to Odysseus: 
“Up with you now, friend; back to town we go; 
and I shall send you in before my father 
who is wondrous wise; there in our house with him 
you'll meet the noblest of the Phaiakians. 
You have good sense, I think; here’s how to do it: 
while we go through the countryside and farmland 
stay with my maids, behind the wagon, walking 
briskly enough to follow where I lead. 
But near the town—well, there’s a wall with towers 
around the Isle, and beautiful ship basins 
right and left of the causeway of approach; 
seagoing craft are beached beside the road 
each on its launching ways. The agora, 
with fieldstone benches bedded in the earth, 
lies either side Poseidon’s shrine—for there 
men are at work on pitch-black hulls and rigging, 
cables and sails, and tapering of oars. 
The archer’s craft is not for the Phaiakians, 
but ship designing, modes of oaring cutters 
in which they love to cross the foaming sea. 
From these fellows I will have no salty talk, 
no gossip later. Plenty are insolent. 
And some seadog might say, after we passed: 
‘Who is this handsome stranger trailing Nausikaa? 
Where did she find him? Will he be her husband? 
Or is she being hospitable to some rover 
come off his ship from lands across the sea— 
there being no lands nearer. A god, maybe? 
a god from heaven, the answer to her prayer, 
descending now—to make her his forever? 
Better, if she’s roamed and found a husband 
somewhere else: none of our own will suit her, 
though many come to court her, and those the best.’ 
This is the way they might make light of me. 
And I myself should hold it shame 
for any girl to flout her own dear parents, 
taking up with a man, before her marriage. 
Note well, now, what I say, friend, and your chances 
are excellent for safe conduct from my father. 
You'll find black poplars in a roadside park 
around a meadow and fountain—all Athena’s— 
but Father has a garden in the place— 
this within earshot of the city wall. 
Go in there and sit down, giving us time 
to pass through town and reach my father’s house. 
And when you can imagine we’re at home, 
then take the road into the city, asking 
directions to the palace of AlkinoGs. 
You'll find it easily: any small boy 
can take you there; no family has a mansion 
half so grand as he does, being king. 
As soon as you are safe inside, cross over 
and go straight through into the mégaron 
to find my mother. She’ll be there in firelight 
before a column, with her maids in shadow, 
spinning a wool dyed richly as the sea. 
My father’s great chair faces the fire, too; 
there like a god he sits and takes his wine. 
Go past him, cast yourself before my mother, 
embrace her knees—and you may wake up soon 
at home rejoicing, though your home be far. 
On Mother’s feeling much depends; if she 
looks on you kindly, you shall see your friends 
under your own roof in your father’s country.” 
At this she raised her glistening whip, lashing 
the team into a run; they left the river 
cantering beautifully, then trotted smartly. 
But then she reined them in, and spared the whip, 
so that her maids could follow with Odysseus. 
The sun was going down when they went by 
Athena’s grove. Here, then, Odysseus rested, 
and lifted up his prayer to Zeus’s daughter: 
“Hear me, unwearied child of royal Zeus! 
O listen to me now—thou so aloof 
while the Earthshaker wrecked and battered me. 
May I find love and mercy among these people.” 
He prayed for that, and Pallas Athena heard him— 
although in deference to her father’s brother 
she would not show her true form to Odysseus, 
at whom Poseidon smoldered on 
until the kingly man came home to his own shore. 


BOOK 7

As Lord Odysseus prayed there in the grove 
the girl rode on, behind her strapping team, 
and came late to the mansion of her father, 
where she reined in at the courtyard gate. Her brothers 
awaited her like tall gods in the court, 
circling to lead the mules away and carry 
the laundered things inside. But she withdrew 
to her own bedroom, where a fire soon shone, 
kindled by her old nurse, Eurymedousa. 
Years ago, from a raid on the continent, 
the rolling ships had brought this woman over 
to be Alkinoés’ share—fit spoil for him 
whose realm hung on his word as on a god’s. 
And she had schooled the princess, Nausikaa, 
whose fire she tended now, making her supper. 
Odysseus, when the time had passed, arose 
and turned into the city. But Athena 
poured a sea fog around him as he went— 
her love’s expedient, that no jeering sailor 
should halt the man or challenge him for luck. 
Instead, as he set foot in the pleasant city, 
the grey-eyed goddess came to him, in figure 
a small girl child, hugging a water jug. 
Confronted by her, Lord Odysseus asked: 
“Little one, could you take me to the house 
of that Alkinoés, king among these people? 
You see, I am a poor old stranger here; 
my home is far away; here there is no one 
known to me, in countryside or city.” 
The grey-eyed goddess Athena replied to him: 
“Oh yes, good grandfer, sir, I know, Pll show you 
the house you mean; it is quite near my father’s. 
But come now, hush, like this, and follow me. 
You must not stare at people, or be inquisitive. 
They do not care for strangers in this neighborhood; 
a foreign man will get no welcome here. 
The only things they trust are the racing ships 
Poseidon gave, to sail the deep blue sea 
like white wings in the sky, or a flashing thought.” 
Pallas Athena turned like the wind, running 
ahead of him, and he followed in her footsteps. 
And no seafaring men of Phaiakia 
perceived Odysseus passing through their town: 
the awesome one in pigtails barred their sight 
with folds of sacred mist. And yet Odysseus 
gazed out marvelling at the ships and harbors, 
public squares, and ramparts towering up 
with pointed palisades along the top. 
When they were near the mansion of the king, 
grey-eyed Athena in the child cried out: 
“Here it is, grandfer, sir—that mansion house 
you asked to see. You'll find our king and queen 
at supper, but you must not be dismayed; 
go in to them. A cheerful man does best 
in every enterprise—even a stranger. 
You'll see our lady just inside the hall— 
her name is Arete; her grandfather 
was our good king Alkinos’s father— 
Nausithods by name, son of Poseidon 
and Periboia. That was a great beauty, 
the daughter of Eurymedon, commander 
of the Gigantés in the olden days, 
who led those wild things to their doom and his. 
Poseidon then made love to Periboia, 
and she bore Nausithods, Phaiakia’s lord, 
whose sons in turn were Rhéxénor and Alkinods. 
Rhéxénor had no sons; even as a bridegroom 
he fell before the silver bow of Apollo, 
his only child a daughter, Arete. 
When she grew up, Alkinoos married her 
and holds her dear. No lady in the world, 
no other mistress of a man’s household, 
is honored as our mistress is, and loved, 
by her own children, by AlkinoGs, 
and by the people. When she walks the town 
they murmur and gaze, as though she were a goddess. 
No grace or wisdom fails in her; indeed 
just men in quarrels come to her for equity. 
Supposing, then, she looks upon you kindly, 
the chances are that you shall see your friends 
under your own roof, in your father’s country.” 
At this the grey-eyed goddess Athena left him 
and left that comely land, going over sea 
to Marathon, to the wide roadways of Athens 
and her retreat in the stronghold of Erekhtheus. 
Odysseus, now alone before the palace, 
meditated a long time before crossing 
the brazen threshold of the great courtyard. 
High rooms he saw ahead, airy and luminous 
as though with lusters of the sun and moon, 
bronze-paneled walls, at several distances, 
making a vista, with an azure molding 
of lapis lazuli. The doors were golden 
guardians of the great room. Shining bronze 
plated the wide door sill; the posts and lintel 
were silver upon silver; golden handles 
curved on the doors, and golden, too, and silver 
were sculptured hounds, flanking the entrance way, 
cast by the skill and ardor of Hephaistos 
to guard the prince Alkinods’s house— 
undying dogs that never could grow old. 
Through all the rooms, as far as he could see, 
tall chairs were placed around the walls, and strewn 
with fine embroidered stuff made by the women. 
Here were enthroned the leaders of Phaiakia 
drinking and dining, with abundant fare. 
Here, too, were boys of gold on pedestals 
holding aloft bright torches of pitch pine 
to light the great rooms, and the night-time feasting. 
And fifty maids-in-waiting of the household 
sat by the round mill, grinding yellow corn, 
or wove upon their looms, or twirled their distaffs, 
flickering like the leaves of a poplar tree; 
while drops of oil glistened on linen weft. 
Skillful as were the men of Phaiakia 
in ship handling at sea, so were these women 
skilled at the loom, having this lovely craft 
and artistry as talents from Athena. 
To left and right, outside, he saw an orchard 
closed by a pale—four spacious acres planted 
with trees in bloom or weighted down for picking: 
pear trees, pomegranates, brilliant apples, 
luscious figs, and olives ripe and dark. 
Fruit never failed upon these trees: winter 
and summer time they bore, for through the year 
the breathing Westwind ripened all in turn— 
so one pear came to prime, and then another, 
and so with apples, figs, and the vine’s fruit 
empurpled in the royal vineyard there. 
Currants were dried at one end, on a platform 
bare to the sun, beyond the vintage arbors 
and vats the vintners trod; while near at hand 
were new grapes barely formed as the green bloom fell, 
or half-ripe clusters, faintly coloring. 
After the vines came rows of vegetables 
of all the kinds that flourish in every season, 
and through the garden plots and orchard ran 
channels from one clear fountain, while another 
gushed through a pipe under the courtyard entrance 
to serve the house and all who came for water. 
These were the gifts of heaven to AlkinoGs, 
Odysseus, who had borne the barren sea, 
stood in the gateway and surveyed this bounty. 
He gazed his fill, then swiftly he went in. 
The lords and nobles of Phaiakia 
were tipping wine to the wakeful god, to Hermés— 
a last libation before going to bed— 
but down the hall Odysseus went unseen, 
still in the cloud Athena cloaked him in, 
until he reached Arete, and the king. 
He threw his great hands round Arete’s knees, 
whereon the sacred mist curled back; 
they saw him; and the diners hushed amazed 
to see an unknown man inside the palace. 
Under their eyes Odysseus made his plea: 
“Arété, admirable Rhexenor’s daughter, 
here is a man bruised by adversity, thrown 
upon your mercy and the king your husband’s, 
begging indulgence of this company— 
may the gods’ blessing rest on them! May life 
be kind to all! Let each one leave his children 
every good thing this realm confers upon him! 
But grant me passage to my father land. 
My home and friends lie far. My life is pain.” 
He moved, then, toward the fire, and sat him down 
amid the ashes. No one stirred or spoke 
until Ekheneos broke the spell—an old man, 
eldest of the Phaiakians, an oracle, 
versed in the laws and manners of old time. 
He rose among them now and spoke out kindly: 
“Alkinods, this will not pass for courtesy: 
a guest abased in ashes at our hearth? 
Everyone here awaits your word; so come, then, 
lift the man up; give him a seat of honor, 
a silver-studded chair. Then tell the stewards 
we'll have another wine bowl for libation 
to Zeus, lord of the lightning—advocate 
of honorable petitioners. And supper 
may be supplied our friend by the larder mistress.” 
Alkinos, calm in power, heard him out, 
then took the great adventurer by the hand 
and led him from the fire. Nearest his throne 
the son whom he loved best, Ladamas, 
had long held place; now the king bade him rise 
and gave his shining chair to Lord Odysseus. 
A serving maid poured water for his hands 
from a gold pitcher into a silver bowl, 
and spread a polished table at his side; 
the mistress of provisions came with bread 
and other victuals, generous with her store. 
So Lord Odysseus drank, and tasted supper. 
Seeing this done, the king in majesty 
said to his squire: 
“A fresh bowl, Pontónoös; 
we make libation to the lord of lightning, 
who seconds honorable petitioners.” 
Mixing the honey-hearted wine, Pontónoös 
went on his rounds and poured fresh cups for all, 
whereof when all had spilt they drank their fill. 
Alkinoés then spoke to the company: 
“My lords and leaders of Phaiakia: 
hear now, all that my heart would have me say. 
Our banquet’s ended, so you may retire; 
but let our seniors gather in the morning 
to give this guest a festal day, and make 
fair offerings to the gods. In due course we 
shall put our minds upon the means at hand 
to take him safely, comfortably, well 
and happily, with speed, to his own country, 
distant though it may lie. And may no trouble 
come to him here or on the way; his fate 
he shall pay out at home, even as the Spinners 
spun for him on the day his mother bore him. 
If, as may be, he is some god, come down 
from heaven’s height, the gods are working strangely: 
until now, they have shown themselves in glory 
only after great hekatombs—those figures 
banqueting at our side, throned like ourselves. 
Or if some traveller met them when alone 
they bore no least disguise; we are their kin; Gigantés, 
Kyklopés, rank no nearer gods than we.” 
Odysseus’ wits were ready, and he replied: 
“Alkinoés, you may set your mind at rest. 
Body and birth, a most unlikely god 
am I, being all of earth and mortal nature. 
I should say, rather, I am like those men 
who suffer the worst trials that you know, 
and miseries greater yet, as I might tell you— 
hundreds; indeed the gods could send no more. 
You will indulge me if I finish dinner—? 
grieved though I am to say it. There’s no part 
of man more like a dog than brazen Belly, 
crying to be remembered—and it must be— 
when we are mortal weary and sick at heart; 
and that is my condition. Yet my hunger 
drives me to take this food, and think no more 
of my afflictions. Belly must be filled. 
Be equally impelled, my lords, tomorrow 
to berth me in a ship and send me home! 
Rough years I’ve had; now may I see once more 
my hall, my lands, my people before I die!” 
Now all who heard cried out assent to this: 
the guest had spoken well; he must have passage. 
Then tipping wine they drank their thirst away, 
and one by one went homeward for the night. 
So Lord Odysseus kept his place alone 
with Arété and the king Alkinodés 
beside him, while the maids went to and fro 
clearing away the wine cups and the tables. 
Presently the ivory-skinned lady 
turned to him—for she knew his cloak and tunic 
to be her own fine work, done with her maids— 
and arrowy came her words upon the air: 
“Friend, I, for one, have certain questions for you. 
Who are you, and who has given you this clothing? 
Did you not say you wandered here by sea?” 
The great tactician carefully replied: 
“Ah, majesty, what labor it would be 
to go through the whole story! All my years 
of misadventures, given by those on high! 
But this you ask about is quickly told: 
in mid-ocean lies Ogygia, the island 
haunt of Kalypso, Atlas’ guileful daughter, 
a lovely goddess and a dangerous one. 
No one, no god or man, consorts with her; 
but supernatural power brought me there 
to be her solitary guest: for Zeus 
let fly with his bright bolt and split my ship, 
rolling me over in the winedark sea. 
There all my shipmates, friends were drowned, while I 
hung on the keelboard of the wreck and drifted 
nine full days. Then in the dead of night 
the gods brought me ashore upon Ogygia 
into her hands. The enchantress in her beauty 
fed and caressed me, promised me I should be 
immortal, youthful, all the days to come; 
but in my heart I never gave consent 
though seven years detained. Immortal clothing 
I had from her, and kept it wet with tears. 
Then came the eighth year on the wheel of heaven 
and word to her from Zeus, or a change of heart, 
so that she now commanded me to sail, 
sending me out to sea on a craft I made 
with timber and tools of hers. She gave me stores, 
victuals and wine, a cloak divinely woven, 
and made a warm land breeze come up astern. 
Seventeen days I sailed in the open water 
before I saw your country’s shore, a shadow 
upon the sea rim. Then my heart rejoiced— 
pitiable as I am! For blows aplenty 
awaited me from the god who shakes the earth. 
Cross gales he blew, making me lose my bearings, 
and heaved up seas beyond imagination— 
huge and foundering seas. All I could do 
was hold hard, groaning under every shock, 
until my craft broke up in the hurricane. 
I kept afloat and swam your sea, or drifted, 
taken by wind and current to this coast 
where I went in on big swells running landward. 
But cliffs and rock shoals made that place forbidding, 
so I turned back, swimming off shore, and came 
in the end to a river, to auspicious water, 
with smooth beach and a rise that broke the wind. 
I lay there where I fell till strength returned. 
Then sacred night came on, and I went inland 
to high ground and a leaf bed in a thicket. 
Heaven sent slumber in an endless tide 
submerging my sad heart among the leaves. 
That night and next day’s dawn and noon I slept; 
the sun went west; and then sweet sleep unbound me, 
when I became aware of maids—your daughter’s— 
playing along the beach; the princess, too, 
most beautiful. I prayed her to assist me, 
and her good sense was perfect; one could hope 
for no behavior like it from the young, 
thoughtless as they most often are. But she 
gave me good provender and good red wine, 
a river bath, and finally this clothing. 
There is the bitter tale. These are the facts.” 
But in reply Alkinods observed: 
“Friend, my child’s good judgment failed in this— 
not to have brought you in her company home. 
Once you approached her, you became her charge.” 
To this Odysseus tactfully replied: 
“Sir, as to that, you should not blame the princess. 
She did tell me to follow with her maids, 
but I would not. I felt abashed, and feared 
the sight would somehow ruffle or offend you. 
All of us on this earth are plagued by jealousy.” 
Alkinos’ answer was a declaration: 
“Friend, I am not a man for trivial anger: 
better a sense of measure in everything. 
No anger here. I say that if it should please 
our father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo— 
seeing the man you are, seeing your thoughts 
are my own thoughts—my daughter should be yours 
and you my son-in-law, if you remained. 
A home, lands, riches you should have from me 
if you could be contented here. If not, 
by Father Zeus, let none of our men hold you! 
On the contrary, I can assure you now 
of passage late tomorrow: while you sleep 
my men will row you through the tranquil night 
to your own land and home or where you please. 
It may be, even, far beyond Euboia— 
called most remote by seamen of our isle 
who landed there, conveying Rhadamanthos 
when he sought Tityos, the son of Gaia. 
They put about, with neither pause nor rest, 
and entered their home port the selfsame day. 
But this you, too, will see: what ships I have, 
how my young oarsmen send the foam a-scudding!” 
Now joy welled up in the patient Lord Odysseus 
who said devoutly in the warmest tones: 
“O Father Zeus, let all this be fulfilled 
as spoken by Alkinoés! Earth of harvests 
remember him! Return me to my homeland!” 
In this manner they conversed with one another; 
but the great lady called her maids, and sent them 
to make a kingly bed, with purple rugs 
piled up, and sheets outspread, and fleecy 
coverlets in an eastern colonnade. 
The girls went out with torches in their hands, 
swift at their work of bedmaking; returning 
they whispered at the lord Odysseus’ shoulder: 
“Sir, you may come; your bed has been prepared.” 
How welcome the word “bed” came to his ears! 
Now, then, Odysseus laid him down and slept 
in luxury under the Porch of Morning, 
while in his inner chamber Alkinos 
retired to rest where his dear consort lay. 


BOOK 8

Under the opening fingers of the dawn 
Alkinos, the sacred prince, arose, 
and then arose Odysseus, raider of cities. 
As the king willed, they went down by the shipways 
to the assembly ground of the Phaiakians. 
Side by side the two men took their ease there 
on smooth stone benches. Meanwhile Pallas Athena 
roamed through the byways of the town, contriving 
Odysseus’ voyage home—in voice and feature 
the crier of the king Alkinods 
who stopped and passed the word to every man: 
“Phaiakian lords and counselors, this way! 
Come to assembly: learn about the stranger, 
the new guest at the palace of Alkinods— 
a man the sea drove, but a comely man; 
the gods’ own light is on him.” 
She aroused them, 
and soon the assembly ground and seats were filled 
with curious men, a throng who peered and saw 
the master mind of war, Laértés’ son. 
Athena now poured out her grace upon him, 
head and shoulders, height and mass—a splendor 
awesome to the eyes of the Phaidkians; 
she put him in a fettle to win the day, 
mastering every trial they set to test him. 
When all the crowd sat marshalled, quieted, 
Alkinoés addressed the full assembly: 
“Hear me, lords and captains of the Phaiakians! 
Hear what my heart would have me say! 
Our guest and new friend—nameless to me still— 
comes to my house after long wandering 
in Dawn lands, or among the Sunset races. 
Now he appeals to me for conveyance home. 
As in the past, therefore, let us provide 
passage, and quickly, for no guest of mine 
languishes here for lack of it. Look to it: 
get a black ship afloat on the noble sea, 
and pick our fastest sailer; draft a crew 
of two and fifty from our younger townsmen— 
men who have made their names at sea. Loop oars 
well to your tholepins, lads, then leave the ship, 
come to our house, fall to, and take your supper: 
we'll furnish out a feast for every crewman. 
These are your orders. As for my older peers 
and princes of the realm, let them foregather 
in festival for our friend in my great hall; 
and let no man refuse. Call in our minstrel, 
Demédokos, whom God made lord of song, 
heart-easing, sing upon what theme he will.” 
He turned, led the procession, and those princes 
followed, while his herald sought the minstrel. 
Young oarsmen from the assembly chose a crew 
of two and fifty, as the king commanded, 
and these filed off along the waterside 
to where the ship lay, poised above open water. 
They hauled the black hull down to ride the sea, 
rigging a mast and spar in the black ship, 
with oars at trail from corded rawhide, all 
seamanly; then tried the white sail, hoisting, 
and moored her off the beach. Then going ashore 
the crew went up to the great house of Alkinos. 
Here the enclosures, entrance ways, and rooms 
were filled with men, young men and old, for whom 
Alkínoös had put twelve sheep to sacrifice, 
eight tuskers and a pair of shambling oxen. 
These, now, they flayed and dressed to make their banquet. 
The crier soon came, leading that man of song 
whom the Muse cherished; by her gift he knew 
the good of life, and evil— 
for she who lent him sweetness made him blind. 
Pontónoös fixed a studded chair for him 
hard by a pillar amid the banqueters, 
hanging the taut harp from a peg above him, 
and guided up his hands upon the strings; 
placed a bread basket at his side, and poured 
wine in a cup, that he might drink his fill. 
Now each man’s hand went out upon the banquet. 
In time, when hunger and thirst were turned away, 
the Muse brought to the minstrel’s mind a song 
of heroes whose great fame rang under heaven: 
the clash between Odysseus and Akhilleus, 
how one time they contended at the godfeast 
raging, and the marshal, Agamemnon, 
felt inward joy over his captains’ quarrel; 
for such had been foretold him by Apollo 
at Pytho—hallowed height—when the Akhaian 
crossed that portal of rock to ask a sign— 
in the old days when grim war lay ahead 
for Trojans and Danaans, by God’s will. 
So ran the tale the minstrel sang. Odysseus 
with massive hand drew his rich mantle down 
over his brow, cloaking his face with it, 
to make the Phaidkians miss the secret tears 
that started to his eyes. How skillfully 
he dried them when the song came to a pause! 
threw back his mantle, spilt his gout of wine! 
But soon the minstrel plucked his note once more 
to please the Phaiakian lords, who loved the song; 
then in his cloak Odysseus wept again. 
His tears flowed in the mantle unperceived; 
only Alkinos, at his elbow, saw them, 
and caught the low groan in the man’s breathing. 
At once he spoke to all the seafolk round him: 
“Hear me, lords and captains of the Phaidkians. 
Our meat is shared, our hearts are full of pleasure 
from the clear harp tone that accords with feasting; 
now for the field and track; we shall have trials 
in the pentathlon. Let our guest go home 
and tell his friends what champions we are 
at boxing, wrestling, broadjump and foot racing.” 
On this he led the way and all went after. 
The crier unslung and pegged the shining harp 
and, taking Demdédokos’s hand, 
led him along with all the rest—Phaiakian 
peers, gay amateurs of the great games. 
They gained the common where a crowd was forming, 
and many a young athlete now came forward 
with seaside names like Tipmast, Tiderace, Sparwood, 
Hullman, Sternman, Beacher and Pullerman, 
Bluewater, Shearwater, Runningwake, Boardalee, 
Seabelt, son of Grandfleet Shipwrightson; 
Seareach stepped up, son of the Launching Master, 
rugged as Ares, bane of men: his build 
excelled all but the Prince Laódamas; 
and Laéddamas made entry with his brothers, 
Halios and Klytóneus, sons of the king. 
The runners, first, must have their quarter mile. 
All lined up tense; then Go! and down the track 
they raised the dust in a flying bunch, strung out 
longer and longer behind Prince Klyténeus. 
By just so far as a mule team, breaking ground, 
will distance oxen, he left all behind 
and came up to the crowd, an easy winner. 
Then they made room for wrestling—grinding bouts 
that Seareach won, pinning the strongest men; 
then the broadjump; first place went to Seabelt; 
Sparwood gave the discus the mightiest fling, 
and Prince Laddamas outboxed them all. 
Now it was he, the son of AlkinoGs, 
who said when they had run through these diversions: 
“Look here, friends, we ought to ask the stranger 
if he competes in something. He’s no cripple; 
look at his leg muscles and his forearms. 
Neck like a bollard; strong as a bull, he seems; 
and not old, though he may have gone stale under 
the rough times he had. Nothing like the sea 
for wearing out the toughest man alive.” 
Then Seareach took him up at once, and said: 
“Laéddamas, youre right, by all the powers. 
Go up to him, yourself, and put the question.” 
At this, Alkinoés’ tall son advanced 
to the center ground, and there addressed Odysseus: 
“Friend, Excellency, come join our competition, 
if you are practiced, as you seem to be. 
While a man lives he wins no greater honor 
than footwork and the skill of hands can bring him. 
Enter our games, then; ease your heart of trouble. 
Your journey home is not far off, remember; 
the ship is launched, the crew all primed for sea.” 
Odysseus, canniest of men, replied: 
“Laéddamas, why do you young chaps challenge me? 
I have more on my mind than track and field— 
hard days, and many, have I seen, and suffered. 
I sit here at your field meet, yes; but only 
as one who begs your king to send him home.” 
Now Seareach put his word in, and contentiously: 
“The reason being, as I see it, friend, 
you never learned a sport, and have no skill 
in any of the contests of fighting men. 
You must have been the skipper of some tramp 
that crawled from one port to the next, jam full 
of chaffering hands: a tallier of cargoes, 
itching for gold—not, by your looks, an athlete.” 
Odysseus frowned, and eyed him coldly, saying: 
“That was uncalled for, friend, you talk like a fool. 
The gods deal out no gift, this one or any— 
birth, brains, or speech—to every man alike. 
In looks a man may be a shade, a specter, 
and yet be master of speech so crowned with beauty 
that people gaze at him with pleasure. Courteous, 
sure of himself, he can command assemblies, 
and when he comes to town, the crowds gather. 
A handsome man, contrariwise, may lack 
grace and good sense in everything he says. 
You now, for instance, with your fine physique— 
a god’s, indeed—you have an empty noddle. 
I find my heart inside my ribs aroused 
by your impertinence. I am no stranger 
to contests, as you fancy. I rated well 
when I could count on youth and my two hands. 
Now pain has cramped me, and my years of combat 
hacking through ranks in war, and the bitter sea. 
Aye. Even so IIl give your games a trial. 
You spoke heart-wounding words. You shall be answered.” 
He leapt out, cloaked as he was, and picked a discus, 
a rounded stone, more ponderous than those 
already used by the Phaidkian throwers, 
and, whirling, let it fly from his great hand 
with a low hum. The crowd went flat on the ground— 
all those oar-pulling, seafaring Phaiakians— 
under the rushing noise. The spinning disk 
soared out, light as a bird, beyond all others. 
Disguised now as a Phaidkian, Athena 
staked it and called out: 
“Even a blind man, 
friend, could judge this, finding with his fingers 
one discus, quite alone, beyond the cluster. 
Congratulations; this event is yours; 
not a man here can beat you or come near you.” 
That was a cheering hail, Odysseus thought, 
seeing one friend there on the emulous field, 
so, in relief, he turned among the Phaiakians 
and said: 
“Now come alongside that one, lads. 
The next I’ll send as far, I think, or farther. 
Anyone else on edge for competition 
try me now. By heaven, you angered me. 
Racing, wrestling, boxing—I bar nothing 
with any man except Laddamas, 
for he’s my host. Who quarrels with his host? 
Only a madman—or no man at all— 
would challenge his protector among strangers, 
cutting the ground away under his feet. 
Here are no others I will not engage, 
none but I hope to know what he is made of. 
Inept at combat, am I? Not entirely. 
Give me a smooth bow; I can handle it, 
and I might well be first to hit my man 
amid a swarm of enemies, though archers 
in company around me drew together. 
Philoktétés alone, at Troy, when we 
Akhaians took the bow, used to outshoot me. 
Of men who now eat bread upon the earth 
I hold myself the best hand with a bow— 
conceding mastery to the men of old, 
Heraklés, or Eurytos of Oikhalia, 
heroes who vied with gods in bowmanship. 
Eurytos came to grief, it’s true; old age 
never crept over him in his long hall; 
Apollo took his challenge ill, and killed him. 
What then, the spear? Pll plant it like an arrow. 
Only in sprinting, ’m afraid, I may 
be passed by someone. Roll of the sea waves 
wearied me, and the victuals in my ship 
ran low; my legs are flabby.” 
When he finished, 
the rest were silent, but Alkinods answered: 
“Friend, we take your challenge in good part, 
for this man angered and affronted you 
here at our peaceful games. You’d have us note 
the prowess that is in you, and so clearly, 
no man of sense would ever cry it down! 
Come, turn your mind, now, on a thing to tell 
among your peers when you are home again, 
dining in hall, beside your wife and children: 
I mean our prowess, as you may remember it, 
for we, too, have our skills, given by Zeus, 
and practiced from our father’s time to this— 
not in the boxing ring nor the palestra 
conspicuous, but in racing, land or sea; 
and all our days we set great store by feasting, 
harpers, and the grace of dancing choirs, 
changes of dress, warm baths, and downy beds. 
O master dancers of the Phaidkians! 
Perform now: let our guest on his return 
tell his companions we excel the world 
in dance and song, as in our ships and running. 
Someone go find the gittern harp in hall 
and bring it quickly to Demdédokos!” 
At the serene king’s word, a squire ran 
to bring the polished harp out of the palace, 
and place was given to nine referees— 
peers of the realm, masters of ceremony— 
who cleared a space and smoothed a dancing floor. 
The squire brought down, and gave Demddokos, 
the clear-toned harp; and centering on the minstrel 
magical young dancers formed a circle 
with a light beat, and stamp of feet. Beholding, 
Odysseus marvelled at the flashing ring. 
Now to his harp the blinded minstrel sang 
of Ares’ dalliance with Aphrodite: 
how hidden in Hephaistos’ house they played 
at love together, and the gifts of Ares, 
dishonoring Hephaistos’ bed—and how 
the word that wounds the heart came to the master 
from Hélios, who had seen the two embrace; 
and when he learned it, Lord Hephaistos went 
with baleful calculation to his forge. 
There mightily he armed his anvil block 
and hammered out a chain whose tempered links 
could not be sprung or bent; he meant that they should hold. 
Those shackles fashioned hot in wrath Hephaistos 
climbed to the bower and the bed of love, 
pooled all his net of chain around the bed posts 
and swung it from the rafters overhead— 
light as a cobweb even gods in bliss 
could not perceive, so wonderful his cunning. 
Seeing his bed now made a snare, he feigned 
a journey to the trim stronghold of Lemnos, 
the dearest of earth’s towns to him. And Ares? 
Ah, golden Ares’ watch had its reward 
when he beheld the great smith leaving home. 
How promptly to the famous door he came, 
intent on pleasure with sweet Kythereia! 
She, who had left her father’s side but now, 
sat in her chamber when her lover entered; 
and tenderly he pressed her hand and said: 
“Come and lie down, my darling, and be happy! 
Hephaistos is no longer here, but gone 
to see his grunting Sintian friends on Lemnos.” 
As she, too, thought repose would be most welcome, 
the pair went in to bed—into a shower 
of clever chains, the netting of Hephaistos. 
So trussed they could not move apart, nor rise, 
at last they knew there could be no escape, 
they were to see the glorious cripple now— 
for Helios had spied for him, and told him; 
so he turned back this side of Lemnos Isle, 
sick at heart, making his way homeward. 
Now in the doorway of the room he stood 
while deadly rage took hold of him; his voice, 
hoarse and terrible, reached all the gods: 
“O Father Zeus, O gods in bliss forever, 
here is indecorous entertainment for you, 
Aphrodite, Zeus’s daughter, 
caught in the act, cheating me, her cripple, 
with Arés—devastating Ares. 
Cleanlimbed beauty is her joy, not these 
bandylegs I came into the world with: 
no one to blame but the two gods who bred me! 
Come see this pair entwining here 
in my own bed! How hot it makes me burn! 
I think they may not care to lie much longer, 
pressing on one another, passionate lovers; 
they’ll have enough of bed together soon. 
And yet the chain that bagged them holds them down 
till Father sends me back my wedding gifts— 
all that I poured out for his damned pigeon, 
so lovely, and so wanton.” 
All the others 
were crowding in, now, to the brazen house— 
Poseidon who embraces earth, and Hermes 
the runner, and Apollo, lord of Distance. 
The goddesses stayed home for shame; but these 
munificences ranged there in the doorway, 
and irrepressible among them all 
arose the laughter of the happy gods. 
Gazing hard at Hephaistos’ handiwork 
the gods in turn remarked among themselves: 
“No dash in adultery now.” 
“The tortoise tags the hare— 
Hephaistos catches Arés—and Ares outran the wind.” 
“The lame god’s craft has pinned him. Now shall he 
pay what is due from gods taken in cuckoldry.” 
They made these improving remarks to one another, 
but Apollo leaned aside to say to Hermes: 
“Son of Zeus, beneficent Wayfinder, 
would you accept a coverlet of chain, if only 
you lay by Aphrodite’s golden side?” 
To this the Wayfinder replied, shining: 
“Would I not, though, Apollo of distances! 
Wrap me in chains three times the weight of these, 
come goddesses and gods to see the fun; 
only let me lie beside the pale-golden one!” 
The gods gave way again to peals of laughter, 
all but Poseidon, and he never smiled, 
but urged Hephaistos to unpinion Ares, 
saying emphatically, in a loud voice: 
“Free him; 
you will be paid, I swear; ask what you will; 
he pays up every jot the gods decree.” 
To this the Great Gamelegs replied: 
“Poseidon, 
lord of the earth-surrounding sea, I should not 
swear to a scoundrel’s honor. What have I 
as surety from you, if Ares leaves me 
empty-handed, with my empty chain?” 
The Earth-shaker for answer urged again: 
“Hephaistos, let us grant he goes, and leaves 
the fine unpaid; I swear, then, I shall pay it.” 
Then said the Great Gamelegs at last: 
“No more; 
you offer terms I cannot well refuse.” 
And down the strong god bent to set them free, 
till disencumbered of their bond, the chain, 
the lovers leapt away—he into Thrace, 
while Aphrodite, laughter’s darling, fled 
to Kypros Isle and Paphos, to her meadow 
and altar dim with incense. There the Graces 
bathed and anointed her with golden oil— 
a bloom that clings upon immortal flesh alone— 
and let her folds of mantle fall in glory. 
So ran the song the minstrel sang. 
Odysseus, 
listening, found sweet pleasure in the tale, 
among the Phaidkian mariners and oarsmen. 
And next Alkínoös called upon his sons, 
Halios and Laéddamas, to show 
the dance no one could do as well as they— 
handling a purple ball carven by Pélybos. 
One made it shoot up under the shadowing clouds 
as he leaned backward; bounding high in air 
the other cut its flight far off the ground— 
and neither missed a step as the ball soared. 
The next turn was to keep it low, and shuttling 
hard between them, while the ring of boys 
gave them a steady stamping beat. 
Odysseus now addressed Alkínoös: 
“O majesty, model of all your folk, 
your promise was to show me peerless dancers; 
here is the promise kept. I am all wonder.” 
At this Alkinoés in his might rejoicing 
said to the seafarers of Phaidkia: 
“Attend me now, Phaiakian lords and captains: 
our guest appears a clear-eyed man and wise. 
Come, let him feel our bounty as he should. 
Here are twelve princes of the kingdom—lords 
paramount, and I who make thirteen; 
let each one bring a laundered cloak and tunic, 
and add one bar of honorable gold. 
Heap all our gifts together; load his arms; 
let him go joyous to our evening feast! 
As for Seareach—why, man to man 
he’ll make amends, and handsomely; he blundered.” 
Now all as one acclaimed the king’s good pleasure, 
and each one sent a squire to bring his gifts. 
Meanwhile Seareach found speech again, saying: 
“My lord and model of us all, Alkínoös, 
as you require of me, in satisfaction, 
this broadsword of clear bronze goes to our guest. 
Its hilt is silver, and the ringed sheath 
of new-sawn ivory—a costly weapon.” 
He turned to give the broadsword to Odysseus, 
facing him, saying blithely: 
“Sir, my best 
wishes, my respects; if I offended, 
I hope the seawinds blow it out of mind. 
God send you see your lady and your homeland 
soon again, after the pain of exile.” 
Odysseus, the great tactician, answered: 
“My hand, friend; may the gods award you fortune. 
I hope no pressing need comes on you ever 
for this fine blade you give me in amends.” 
He slung it, glinting silver, from his shoulder, 
as the light shone from sundown. Messengers 
were bearing gifts and treasure to the palace, 
where the king’s sons received them all, and made 
a glittering pile at their grave mother’s side; 
then, as Alkinoés took his throne of power, 
each went to his own high-backed chair in turn, 
and said Alkinos to Arete: 
“Lady, bring here a chest, the finest one; 
a clean cloak and tunic; stow these things; 
and warm a cauldron for him. Let him bathe, 
when he has seen the gifts of the Phaidkians, 
and so dine happily to a running song. 
My own wine-cup of gold intaglio 
I'll give him, too; through all the days to come, 
tipping his wine to Zeus or other gods 
in his great hall, he shall remember me.” 
Then said Arété to her maids: 
“The tripod: 
stand the great tripod legs about the fire.” 
They swung the cauldron on the fire’s heart, 
poured water in, and fed the blaze beneath 
until the basin simmered, cupped in flame. 
The queen set out a rich chest from her chamber 
and folded in the gifts—clothing and gold 
given Odysseus by the Phaiakians; 
then she put in the royal cloak and tunic, 
briskly saying to her guest: 
“Now here, sir, 
look to the lid yourself, and tie it down 
against light fingers, if there be any, 
on the black ship tonight while you are sleeping.” 
Noble Odysseus, expert in adversity, 
battened the lid down with a lightning knot 
learned, once, long ago, from the Lady Kirké. 
And soon a call came from the Bathing Mistress 
who led him to a hip-bath, warm and clear— 
a happy sight, and rare in his immersions 
after he left Kalypso’s home—where, surely, 
the luxuries of a god were ever his. 
When the bath maids had washed him, rubbed him down, 
put a fresh tunic and a cloak around him, 
he left the bathing place to join the men 
at wine in hall. 
The princess Nausikaa, 
exquisite figure, as of heaven’s shaping, 
waited beside a pillar as he passed 
and said swiftly, with wonder in her look: 
“Fare well, stranger; in your land remember me 
who met and saved you. It is worth your thought.” 
The man of all occasions now met this: 
“Daughter of great Alkinoés, Nausikaa, 
may Zeus the lord of thunder, Hera’s consort, 
grant me daybreak again in my own country! 
But there and all my days until I die 
may I invoke you as I would a goddess, 
princess, to whom I owe my life.” 
He left her 
and went to take his place beside the king. 
Now when the roasts were cut, the winebowls full, 
a herald led the minstrel down the room 
amid the deference of the crowd, and paused 
to seat him near a pillar in the— 
whereupon that resourceful man, Odysseus, 
carved out a quarter from his chine of pork, 
crisp with fat, and called the blind man’s guide: 
“Herald! here, take this to Demddokos: 
let him feast and be merry, with my compliments. 
All men owe honor to the poets—honor 
and awe, for they are dearest to the Muse 
who puts upon their lips the ways of life.” 
Gentle Demédokos took the proffered gift 
and inwardly rejoiced. When all were served, 
every man’s hand went out upon the banquet, 
repelling hunger and thirst, until at length 
Odysseus spoke again to the blind minstrel: 
“Demddokos, accept my utmost praise. 
The Muse, daughter of Zeus in radiance, 
or else Apollo gave you skill to shape 
with such great style your songs of the Akhaians— 
their hard lot, how they fought and suffered war. 
You shared it, one would say, or heard it all. 
Now shift your theme, and sing that wooden horse 
Epeios built, inspired by Athena— 
the ambuscade Odysseus filled with fighters 
and sent to take the inner town of Troy. 
Sing only this for me, sing me this well, 
and I shall say at once before the world 
the grace of heaven has given us a song.” 
The minstrel stirred, murmuring to the god, and soon 
clear words and notes came one by one, a vision 
of the Akhaians in their graceful ships 
drawing away from shore: the torches flung 
and shelters flaring: Argive soldiers crouched 
in the close dark around Odysseus: and 
the horse, tall on the assembly ground of Troy. 
For when the Trojans pulled it in, themselves, 
up to the citadel, they sat nearby 
with long-drawn-out and hapless argument— 
favoring, in the end, one course of three: 
either to stave the vault with brazen axes, 
or haul it to a cliff and pitch it down, 
or else to save it for the gods, a votive glory— 
the plan that could not but prevail. 
For Troy must perish, as ordained, that day 
she harbored the great horse of timber; hidden 
the flower of Akhaia lay, and bore 
slaughter and death upon the men of Troy. 
He sang, then, of the town sacked by Akhaians 
pouring down from the horse’s hollow cave, 
this way and that way raping the steep city, 
and how Odysseus came like Ares to 
the door of Deiphobos, with Menelaos, 
and braved the desperate fight there— 
conquering once more by Athena’s power. 
The splendid minstrel sang it. 
And Odysseus 
let the bright molten tears run down his cheeks, 
weeping the way a wife mourns for her lord 
on the lost field where he has gone down fighting 
the day of wrath that came upon his children. 
At sight of the man panting and dying there, 
she slips down to enfold him, crying out; 
then feels the spears, prodding her back and shoulders, 
and goes bound into slavery and grief. 
Piteous weeping wears away her cheeks: 
but no more piteous than Odysseus’ tears, 
cloaked as they were, now, from the company. 
Only AlkinoGs, at his elbow, knew— 
hearing the low sob in the man’s breathing— 
and when he knew, he spoke: 
“Hear me, lords and captains of Phaiakia! 
And let Demodokos touch his harp no more. 
His theme has not been pleasing to all here. 
During the feast, since our fine poet sang, 
our guest has never left off weeping. Grief 
seems fixed upon his heart. Break off the song! 
Let everyone be easy, host and guest; 
there’s more decorum in a smiling banquet! 
We had prepared here, on our friend’s behalf, 
safe conduct in a ship, and gifts to cheer him, 
holding that any man with a grain of wit 
will treat a decent suppliant like a brother. 
Now by the same rule, friend, you must not be 
secretive any longer! Come, in fairness, 
tell me the name you bore in that far country; 
how were you known to family, and neighbors? 
No man is nameless—no man, good or bad, 
but gets a name in his first infancy, 
none being born, unless a mother bears him! 
Tell me your native land, your coast and city— 
sailing directions for the ships, you know— 
for those Phaiakian ships of ours 
that have no steersman, and no steering oar, 
divining the crew’s wishes, as they do, 
and knowing, as they do, the ports of call 
about the world. Hidden in mist or cloud 
they scud the open sea, with never a thought 
of being in distress or going down. 
There is, however, something I once heard 
Nausithods, my father, say: Poseidon 
holds it against us that our deep sea ships 
are sure conveyance for all passengers. 
My father said, some day one of our cutters 
homeward bound over the cloudy sea 
would be wrecked by the god, and a range of hills 
thrown round our city. So, in his age, he said, 
and let it be, or not, as the god please. 
But come, now, put it for me clearly, tell me 
the sea ways that you wandered, and the shores 
you touched; the cities, and the men therein, 
uncivilized, if such there were, and hostile, 
and those godfearing who had kindly manners. 
Tell me why you should grieve so terribly 
over the Argives and the fall of Troy. 
That was all gods’ work, weaving ruin there 
so it should make a song for men to come! 
Some kin of yours, then, died at Ilion, 
some first rate man, by marriage near to you, 
next your own blood most dear? 
Or some companion of congenial mind 
and valor? True it is, a wise friend 
can take a brother’s place in our affection.” 


BOOK 9

Now this was the reply Odysseus made: 
“Alkínoös, king and admiration of men, 
how beautiful this is, to hear a minstrel 
gifted as yours: a god he might be, singing! 
There is no boon in life more sweet, I say, 
than when a summer joy holds all the realm, 
and banqueters sit listening to a harper 
in a great hall, by rows of tables heaped 
with bread and roast meat, while a steward goes 
to dip up wine and brim your cups again. 
Here is the flower of life, it seems to me! 
But now you wish to know my cause for sorrow— 
and thereby give me cause for more. 
What shall I 
say first? What shall I keep until the end? 
The gods have tried me in a thousand ways. 
But first my name: let that be known to you, 
and if I pull away from pitiless death, 
friendship will bind us, though my land lies far. 
I am Laértés’ son, Odysseus. 
Men hold me 
formidable for guile in peace and war: 
this fame has gone abroad to the sky’s rim. 
My home is on the peaked sea-mark of Ithaka 
under Mount Neion’s wind-blown robe of leaves, 
in sight of other islands—Doulfkhion, 
Same, wooded Zakynthos—Ithaka 
being most lofty in that coastal sea, 
and northwest, while the rest lie east and south. 
A rocky isle, but good for a boy’s training; 
I shall not see on earth a place more dear, 
though I have been detained long by Kalypso, 
loveliest among goddesses, who held me 
in her smooth caves, to be her heart’s delight, 
as Kirke of Aiaia, the enchantress, 
desired me, and detained me in her hall. 
But in my heart I never gave consent. 
Where shall a man find sweetness to surpass 
his own home and his parents? In far lands 
he shall not, though he find a house of gold. 
What of my sailing, then, from Troy? 
What of those years 
of rough adventure, weathered under Zeus? 
The wind that carried west from Ilion 
brought me to Ismaros, on the far shore, 
a strongpoint on the coast of the Kikonés. 
I stormed that place and killed the men who fought. 
Plunder we took, and we enslaved the women, 
to make division, equal shares to all— 
but on the spot I told them: ‘Back, and quickly! 
Out to sea again!’ My men were mutinous, 
fools, on stores of wine. Sheep after sheep 
they butchered by the surf, and shambling cattle, 
feasting,—while fugitives went inland, running 
to call to arms the main force of Phaiakia. 
This was an army, trained to fight on horseback 
or, where the ground required, on foot. They came 
with dawn over that terrain like the leaves 
and blades of spring. So doom appeared to us, 
dark word of Zeus for us, our evil days. 
My men stood up and made a fight of it— 
backed on the ships, with lances kept in play, 
from bright morning through the blaze of noon 
holding our beach, although so far outnumbered; 
but when the sun passed toward unyoking time, 
then the Akhaians, one by one, gave way. 
Six benches were left empty in every ship 
that evening when we pulled away from death. 
And this new grief we bore with us to sea: 
our precious lives we had, but not our friends. 
No ship made sail next day until some shipmate 
had raised a cry, three times, for each poor ghost 
unfleshed by the Kikonés on that field. 
Now Zeus the lord of cloud roused in the north 
a storm against the ships, and driving veils 
of squall moved down like night on land and sea. 
The bows went plunging at the gust; sails 
cracked and lashed out strips in the big wind. 
We saw death in that fury, dropped the yards, 
unshipped the oars, and pulled for the nearest lee: 
then two long days and nights we lay offshore 
worn out and sick at heart, tasting our grief, 
until a third Dawn came with ringlets shining. 
Then we put up our masts, hauled sail, and rested, 
letting the steersmen and the breeze take over. 
I might have made it safely home, that time, 
but as I came round Malea the current 
took me out to sea, and from the north 
a fresh gale drove me on, past Kythera. 
Nine days I drifted on the teeming sea 
before dangerous high winds. Upon the tenth 
we came to the coastline of the Lotos Eaters, 
who live upon that flower. We landed there 
to take on water. All ships’ companies 
mustered alongside for the mid-day meal. 
Then I sent out two picked men and a runner 
to learn what race of men that land sustained. 
They fell in, soon enough, with Lotos Eaters, 
who showed no will to do us harm, only 
offering the sweet Lotos to our friends— 
but those who ate this honeyed plant, the Lotos, 
never cared to report, nor to return: 
they longed to stay forever, browsing on 
that native bloom, forgetful of their homeland. 
I drove them, all three wailing, to the ships, 
tied them down under their rowing benches, 
and called the rest: ‘All hands aboard; 
come, clear the beach and no one taste 
the Lotos, or you lose your hope of home.’ 
Filing in to their places by the rowlocks 
my oarsmen dipped their long oars in the surf, 
and we moved out again on our sea faring. 
In the next land we found were Kyklopés, 
giants, louts, without a law to bless them. 
In ignorance leaving the fruitage of the earth in mystery 
to the immortal gods, they neither plow 
nor sow by hand, nor till the ground, though grain— 
wild wheat and barley—grows untended, and 
wine-grapes, in clusters, ripen in heaven’s rain. 
Kyklopés have no muster and no meeting, 
no consultation or old tribal ways, 
but each one dwells in his own mountain cave 
dealing out rough justice to wife and child, 
indifferent to what the others do. 
Well, then: 
across the wide bay from the mainland 
there lies a desert island, not far out, 
but still not close inshore. Wild goats in hundreds 
breed there; and no human being comes 
upon the isle to startle them—no hunter 
of all who ever tracked with hounds through forests 
or had rough going over mountain trails. 
The isle, unplanted and untilled, a wilderness, 
pastures goats alone. And this is why: 
good ships like ours with cheekpaint at the bows 
are far beyond the Kyklopés. No shipwright 
toils among them, shaping and building up 
symmetrical trim hulls to cross the sea 
and visit all the seaboard towns, as men do 
who go and come in commerce over water. 
This isle—seagoing folk would have annexed it 
and built their homesteads on it: all good land, 
fertile for every crop in season: lush 
well-watered meads along the shore, vines in profusion, 
prairie, clear for the plow, where grain would grow 
chin high by harvest time, and rich sub-soil. 
The island cove is landlocked, so you need 
no hawsers out astern, bow-stones or mooring: 
run in and ride there till the day your crews 
chafe to be under sail, and a fair wind blows. 
You'll find good water flowing from a cavern 
through dusky poplars into the upper bay. 
Here we made harbor. Some god guided us 
that night, for we could barely see our bows 
in the dense fog around us, and no moonlight 
filtered through the overcast. No look-out, 
nobody saw the island dead ahead, 
nor even the great landward rolling billow 
that took us in: we found ourselves in shallows, 
keels grazing shore: so furled our sails 
and disembarked where the low ripples broke. 
There on the beach we lay, and slept till morning. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose 
we turned out marvelling, to tour the isle, 
while Zeus’s shy nymph daughters flushed wild goats 
down from the heights—a breakfast for my men. 
We ran to fetch our hunting bows and long-shanked 
lances from the ships, and in three companies 
we took our shots. Heaven gave us game a-plenty: 
for every one of twelve ships in my squadron 
nine goats fell to be shared; my lot was ten. 
So there all day, until the sun went down, 
we made our feast on meat galore, and wine— 
wine from the ship, for our supply held out, 
so many jars were filled at Ismaros 
from stores of the Kikonés that we plundered. 
We gazed, too, at Kyklopés Land, so near, 
we saw their smoke, heard bleating from their flocks. 
But after sundown, in the gathering dusk, 
we slept again above the wash of ripples. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
came in the east, I called my men together 
and made a speech to them: 
‘Old shipmates, friends, 
the rest of you stand by; I’ll make the crossing 
in my own ship, with my own company, 
and find out what the mainland natives are— 
for they may be wild savages, and lawless, 
or hospitable and god fearing men.’ 
At this I went aboard, and gave the word 
to cast off by the stern. My oarsmen followed, 
filing in to their benches by the rowlocks, 
and all in line dipped oars in the grey sea. 
As we rowed on, and nearer to the mainland, 
at one end of the bay, we saw a cavern 
yawning above the water, screened with laurel, 
and many rams and goats about the place 
inside a sheepfold—made from slabs of stone 
earthfast between tall trunks of pine and rugged 
towering oak trees. 
A prodigious man 
slept in this cave alone, and took his flocks 
to graze afield—remote from all companions, 
knowing none but savage ways, a brute 
so huge, he seemed no man at all of those 
who eat good wheaten bread; but he seemed rather 
a shaggy mountain reared in solitude. 
We beached there, and I told the crew 
to stand by and keep watch over the ship; 
as for myself I took my twelve best fighters 
and went ahead. I had a goatskin full 
of that sweet liquor that Euanthes’ son, 
Maron, had given me. He kept Apollo’s 
holy grove at Ismaros; for kindness 
we showed him there, and showed his wife and child, 
he gave me seven shining golden talents 
perfectly formed, a solid silver winebowl, 
and then this liquor—twelve two-handled jars 
of brandy, pure and fiery. Not a slave 
in Maron’s household knew this drink; only 
he, his wife and the storeroom mistress knew; 
and they would put one cupful—ruby-colored, 
honey-smooth—in twenty more of water, 
but still the sweet scent hovered like a fume 
over the winebowl. No man turned away 
when cups of this came round. 
A wineskin full 
I brought along, and victuals in a bag, 
for in my bones I knew some towering brute 
would be upon us soon—all outward power, 
a wild man, ignorant of civility. 
We climbed, then, briskly to the cave. But Kyklops 
had gone afield, to pasture his fat sheep, 
so we looked round at everything inside: 
a drying rack that sagged with cheeses, pens 
crowded with lambs and kids, each in its class: 
firstlings apart from middlings, and the ‘dewdrops,’ 
or newborn lambkins, penned apart from both. 
And vessels full of whey were brimming there— 
bowls of earthenware and pails for milking. 
My men came pressing round me, pleading: 
‘Why not 
take these cheeses, get them stowed, come back, 
throw open all the pens, and make a run for it? 
We'll drive the kids and lambs aboard. We say 
put out again on good salt water!’ 
Ah, 
how sound that was! Yet I refused. I wished 
to see the caveman, what he had to offer— 
no pretty sight, it turned out, for my friends. 
We lit a fire, burnt an offering, 
and took some cheese to eat; then sat in silence 
around the embers, waiting. When he came 
he had a load of dry boughs on his shoulder 
to stoke his fire at suppertime. He dumped it 
with a great crash into that hollow cave, 
and we all scattered fast to the far wall. 
Then over the broad cavern floor he ushered 
the ewes he meant to milk. He left his rams 
and he-goats in the yard outside, and swung 
high overhead a slab of solid rock 
to close the cave. Two dozen four-wheeled wagons, 
with heaving wagon teams, could not have stirred 
the tonnage of that rock from where he wedged it 
over the doorsill. Next he took his seat 
and milked his bleating ewes. A practiced job 
he made of it, giving each ewe her suckling; 
thickened his milk, then, into curds and whey, 
sieved out the curds to drip in withy baskets, 
and poured the whey to stand in bowls 
cooling until he drank it for his supper. 
When all these chores were done, he poked the fire, 
heaping on brushwood. In the glare he saw us. 
‘Strangers,’ he said, ‘who are you? And where from? 
What brings you here by sea ways—a fair traffic? 
Or are you wandering rogues, who cast your lives 
like dice, and ravage other folk by sea?’ 
We felt a pressure on our hearts, in dread 
of that deep rumble and that mighty man. 
But all the same I spoke up in reply: 
‘We are from Troy, Akhaians, blown off course 
by shifting gales on the Great South Sea; 
homeward bound, but taking routes and ways 
uncommon; so the will of Zeus would have it. 
We served under Agamemnon, son of Atreus— 
the whole world knows what city 
he laid waste, what armies he destroyed. 
It was our luck to come here; here we stand, 
beholden for your help, or any gifts 
you give—as custom is to honor strangers. 
We would entreat you, great Sir, have a care 
for the gods’ courtesy; Zeus will avenge 
the unoffending guest.’ 
He answered this 
from his brute chest, unmoved: 
‘You are a ninny, 
or else you come from the other end of nowhere, 
telling me, mind the gods! We Kyklopés 
care not a whistle for your thundering Zeus 
or all the gods in bliss; we have more force by far. 
I would not let you go for fear of Zeus— 
you or your friends—unless I had a whim to. 
Tell me, where was it, now, you left your ship— 
around the point, or down the shore, I wonder?’ 
He thought he’d find out, but I saw through this, 
and answered with a ready lie: 
‘My ship? 
Poseidon Lord, who sets the earth a-tremble, 
broke it up on the rocks at your land’s end. 
A wind from seaward served him, drove us there. 
We are survivors, these good men and I.’ 
Neither reply nor pity came from him, 
but in one stride he clutched at my companions 
and caught two in his hands like squirming puppies 
to beat their brains out, spattering the floor. 
Then he dismembered them and made his meal, 
gaping and crunching like a mountain lion— 
everything : innards, flesh, and marrow bones. 
We cried aloud, lifting our hands to Zeus, 
powerless, looking on at this, appalled; 
but Kyklops went on filling up his belly 
with manflesh and great gulps of whey, 
then lay down like a mast among his sheep. 
My heart beat high now at the chance of action, 
and drawing the sharp sword from my hip I went 
along his flank to stab him where the midriff 
holds the liver. I had touched the spot 
when sudden fear stayed me: if I killed him 
we perished there as well, for we could never 
move his ponderous doorway slab aside. 
So we were left to groan and wait for morning. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
lit up the world, the Kyklops built a fire 
and milked his handsome ewes, all in due order, 
putting the sucklings to the mothers. Then, 
his chores being all dispatched, he caught 
another brace of men to make his breakfast, 
and whisked away his great door slab 
to let his sheep go through—but he, behind, 
reset the stone as one would cap a quiver. 
There was a din of whistling as the Kyklops 
rounded his flock to higher ground, then stillness. 
And now I pondered how to hurt him worst, 
if but Athena granted what I prayed for. 
Here are the means I thought would serve my turn: 
a club, or staff, lay there along the fold— 
an olive tree, felled green and left to season 
for Kyklops’ hand. And it was like a mast 
a lugger of twenty oars, broad in the beam— 
a deep-sea-going craft—might carry: 
so long, so big around, it seemed. Now I 
chopped out a six foot section of this pole 
and set it down before my men, who scraped it; 
and when they had it smooth, I hewed again 
to make a stake with pointed end. I held this 
in the fire’s heart and turned it, toughening it, 
then hid it, well back in the cavern, under 
one of the dung piles in profusion there. 
Now came the time to toss for it: who ventured 
along with me? whose hand could bear to thrust 
and grind that spike in Kyklops’ eye, when mild 
sleep had mastered him? As luck would have it, 
the men I would have chosen won the toss— 
four strong men, and I made five as captain. 
At evening came the shepherd with his flock, 
his woolly flock. The rams as well, this time, 
entered the cave: by some sheep-herding whim— 
or a god’s bidding—none were left outside. 
He hefted his great boulder into place 
and sat him down to milk the bleating ewes 
in proper order, put the lambs to suck, 
and swiftly ran through all his evening chores. 
Then he caught two more men and feasted on them. 
My moment was at hand, and I went forward 
holding an ivy bowl of my dark drink, 
looking up, saying: 
‘Kyklops, try some wine. 
Here’s liquor to wash down your scraps of men. 
Taste it, and see the kind of drink we carried 
under our planks. I meant it for an offering 
if you would help us home. But you are mad, 
unbearable, a bloody monster! After this, 
will any other traveller come to see you?’ 
He seized and drained the bowl, and it went down 
so fiery and smooth he called for more: 
‘Give me another, thank you kindly. Tell me, 
how are you called? TIl make a gift will please you. 
Even Kyklopes know the wine-grapes grow 
out of grassland and loam in heaven’s rain, 
but here’s a bit of nectar and ambrosia!’ 
Three bowls I brought him, and he poured them down. 
I saw the fuddle and flush come over him, 
then I sang out in cordial tones: 
‘Kyklops, 
you ask my honorable name? Remember 
the gift you promised me, and I shall tell you. 
My name is Nohbdy: mother, father, and friends, 
everyone calls me Nohbdy.’ 
And he said: 
‘Nohbdy’s my meat, then, after I eat his friends. 
Others come first. There’s a noble gift, now.’ 
Even as he spoke, he reeled and tumbled backward, 
his great head lolling to one side: and sleep 
took him like any creature. Drunk, hiccuping, 
he dribbled streams of liquor and bits of men. 
Now, by the gods, I drove my big hand spike 
deep in the embers, charring it again, 
and cheered my men along with battle talk 
to keep their courage up: no quitting now. 
The pike of olive, green though it had been, 
reddened and glowed as if about to catch. 
I drew it from the coals and my four fellows 
gave me a hand, lugging it near the Kyklops 
as more than natural force nerved them; straight 
forward they sprinted, lifted it, and rammed it 
deep in his crater eye, and I leaned on it 
turning it as a shipwright turns a drill 
in planking, having men below to swing 
the two-handled strap that spins it in the groove. 
So with our brand we bored that great eye socket 
while blood ran out around the red hot bar. 
Eyelid and lash were seared; the pierced ball 
hissed broiling, and the roots popped. 
In a smithy 
one sees a white-hot axehead or an adze 
plunged and wrung in a cold tub, screeching steam— 
the way they make soft iron hale and hard—: 
just so that eyeball hissed around the spike. 
The Kyklops bellowed and the rock roared round him, 
and we fell back in fear. Clawing his face 
he tugged the bloody spike out of his eye, 
threw it away, and his wild hands went groping; 
then he set up a howl for Kyklopés 
who lived in caves on windy peaks nearby. 
Some heard him; and they came by divers ways 
to clump around outside and call: 
‘What ails you, 
Polyphemos? Why do you cry so sore 
in the starry night? You will not let us sleep. 
Sure no man’s driving off your flock? No man 
has tricked you, ruined you?’ 
Out of the cave 
the mammoth Polyphemos roared in answer: 
‘Nohbdy, Nohbdy’s tricked me, Nohbdy’s ruined me!’ 
To this rough shout they made a sage reply: 
‘Ah well, if nobody has played you foul 
there in your lonely bed, we are no use in pain 
given by great Zeus. Let it be your father, 
Poseidon Lord, to whom you pray.’ 
So saying 
they trailed away. And I was filled with laughter 
to see how like a charm the name deceived them. 
Now Kyklops, wheezing as the pain came on him, 
fumbled to wrench away the great doorstone 
and squatted in the breach with arms thrown wide 
for any silly beast or man who bolted— 
hoping somehow I might be such a fool. 
But I kept thinking how to win the game: 
death sat there huge; how could we slip away? 
I drew on all my wits, and ran through tactics, 
reasoning as a man will for dear life, 
until a trick came—and it pleased me well. 
The Kyklops’ rams were handsome, fat, with heavy 
fleeces, a dark violet. 
Three abreast 
I tied them silently together, twining 
cords of willow from the ogre’s bed; 
then slung a man under each middle one 
to ride there safely, shielded left and right. 
So three sheep could convey each man. I took 
the woolliest ram, the choicest of the flock, 
and hung myself under his kinky belly, 
pulled up tight, with fingers twisted deep 
in sheepskin ringlets for an iron grip. 
So, breathing hard, we waited until morning. 
When Dawn spread out her finger tips of rose 
the rams began to stir, moving for pasture, 
and peals of bleating echoed round the pens 
where dams with udders full called for a milking. 
Blinded, and sick with pain from his head wound, 
the master stroked each ram, then let it pass, 
but my men riding on the pectoral fleece 
the giant’s blind hands blundering never found. 
Last of them all my ram, the leader, came, 
weighted by wool and me with my meditations. 
The Kyklops patted him, and then he said: 
‘Sweet cousin ram, why lag behind the rest 
in the night cave? You never linger so, 
but graze before them all, and go afar 
to crop sweet grass, and take your stately way 
leading along the streams, until at evening 
you run to be the first one in the fold. 
Why, now, so far behind? Can you be grieving 
over your Master’s eye? That carrion rogue 
and his accurst companions burnt it out 
when he had conquered all my wits with wine. 
Nohbdy will not get out alive, I swear. 
Oh, had you brain and voice to tell 
where he may be now, dodging all my fury! 
Bashed by this hand and bashed on this rock wall 
his brains would strew the floor, and I should have 
rest from the outrage Nohbdy worked upon me.’ 
He sent us into the open, then. Close by, 
I dropped and rolled clear of the ram’s belly, 
going this way and that to untie the men. 
With many glances back, we rounded up 
his fat, stiff-legged sheep to take aboard, 
and drove them down to where the good ship lay. 
We saw, as we came near, our fellows’ faces 
shining; then we saw them turn to grief 
tallying those who had not fled from death. 
I hushed them, jerking head and eyebrows up, 
and in a low voice told them: ‘Load this herd; 
move fast, and put the ship’s head toward the breakers.’ 
They all pitched in at loading, then embarked 
and struck their oars into the sea. Far out, 
as far off shore as shouted words would carry, 
I sent a few back to the adversary: 
‘O Kyklops! Would you feast on my companions? 
Puny, am I, in a Caveman’s hands? 
How do you like the beating that we gave you, 
you damned cannibal? Eater of guests 
under your roof! Zeus and the gods have paid you!’ 
The blind thing in his doubled fury broke 
a hilltop in his hands and heaved it after us. 
Ahead of our black prow it struck and sank 
whelmed in a spuming geyser, a giant wave 
that washed the ship stern foremost back to shore. 
I got the longest boathook out and stood 
fending us off, with furious nods to all 
to put their backs into a racing stroke— 
row, row, or perish. So the long oars bent 
kicking the foam sternward, making head 
until we drew away, and twice as far. 
Now when I cupped my hands I heard the crew 
in low voices protesting: 
‘Godsake, Captain! 
Why bait the beast again? Let him alone!’ 
‘That tidal wave he made on the first throw 
all but beached us.’ 
‘All but stove us in!’ 
‘Give him our bearing with your trumpeting, 
he’ll get the range and lob a boulder.’ 
‘Aye 
He’ll smash our timbers and our heads together!’ 
I would not heed them in my glorying spirit, 
but let my anger flare and yelled: 
‘Kyklops, 
if ever mortal man inquire 
how you were put to shame and blinded, tell him 
Odysseus, raider of cities, took your eye: 
Laértés’ son, whose home’s on Ithaka!’ 
At this he gave a mighty sob and rumbled: 
‘Now comes the weird upon me, spoken of old. 
A wizard, grand and wondrous, lived here—Télemos, 
a son of Eurymos; great length of days 
he had in wizardry among the Kyklopes, 
and these things he foretold for time to come: 
my great eye lost, and at Odysseus’ hands. 
Always I had in mind some giant, armed 
in giant force, would come against me here. 
But this, but you—small, pitiful and twiggy— 
you put me down with wine, you blinded me. 
Come back, Odysseus, and Pll treat you well, 
praying the god of earthquake to befriend you— 
his son I am, for he by his avowal 
fathered me, and, if he will, he may 
heal me of this black wound—he and no other 
of all the happy gods or mortal men.’ 
Few words I shouted in reply to him: 
‘If I could take your life I would and take 
your time away, and hurl you down to hell! 
The god of earthquake could not heal you there!’ 
At this he stretched his hands out in his darkness 
toward the sky of stars, and prayed Poseidon: 
‘O hear me, lord, blue girdler of the islands, 
if I am thine indeed, and thou art father: 
grant that Odysseus, raider of cities, never 
see his home: Laértés’ son, I mean, 
who kept his hall on Ithaka. Should destiny 
intend that he shall see his roof again 
among his family in his father land, 
far be that day, and dark the years between. 
Let him lose all companions, and return 
under strange sail to bitter days at home.’ 
In these words he prayed, and the god heard him. 
Now he laid hands upon a bigger stone 
and wheeled around, titanic for the cast, 
to let it fly in the black-prowed vessel’s track. 
But it fell short, just aft the steering oar, 
and whelming seas rose giant above the stone 
to bear us onward toward the island. 
There 
as we ran in we saw the squadron waiting, 
the trim ships drawn up side by side, and all 
our troubled friends who waited, looking seaward. 
We beached her, grinding keel in the soft sand, 
and waded in, ourselves, on the sandy beach. 
Then we unloaded all the Kyklops’ flock 
to make division, share and share alike, 
only my fighters voted that my ram, 
the prize of all, should go to me. I slew him 
by the sea side and burnt his long thighbones 
to Zeus beyond the stormcloud, Kronos’ son, 
who rules the world. But Zeus disdained my offering; 
destruction for my ships he had in store 
and death for those who sailed them, my companions. 
Now all day long until the sun went down 
we made our feast on mutton and sweet wine, 
till after sunset in the gathering dark 
we went to sleep above the wash of ripples. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
touched the world, I roused the men, gave orders 
to man the ships, cast off the mooring lines; 
and filing in to sit beside the rowlocks 
oarsmen in line dipped oars in the grey sea. 
So we moved out, sad in the vast offing, 
having our precious lives, but not our friends. 


BOOK 10

We made our landfall on Aiolia Island, 
domain of Aiolos Hippotadés, 
the wind king dear to the gods who never die— 
an isle adrift upon the sea, ringed round 
with brazen ramparts on a sheer cliffside. 
Twelve children had old Aiolos at home— 
six daughters and six lusty sons—and he 
gave girls to boys to be their gentle brides; 
now those lords, in their parents’ company, 
sup every day in hall—a royal feast 
with fumes of sacrifice and winds that pipe 
‘round hollow courts; and all the night they sleep 
on beds of filigree beside their ladies. 
Here we put in, lodged in the town and palace, 
while Aiolos played host to me. He kept me 
one full month to hear the tale of Troy, 
the ships and the return of the Akhaians, 
all which I told him point by point in order. 
When in return I asked his leave to sail 
and asked provisioning, he stinted nothing, 
adding a bull’s hide sewn from neck to tail 
into a mighty bag, bottling storm winds; 
for Zeus had long ago made Aiolos 
warden of winds, to rouse or calm at will. 
He wedged this bag under my afterdeck, 
lashing the neck with shining silver wire 
so not a breath got through; only the west wind 
he lofted for me in a quartering breeze 
to take my squadron spanking home. 
No luck: 
the fair wind failed us when our prudence failed. 
Nine days and nights we sailed without event, 
till on the tenth we raised our land. We neared it, 
and saw men building fires along the shore; 
but now, being weary to the bone, I fell 
into deep slumber; I had worked the sheet 
nine days alone, and given it to no one, 
wishing to spill no wind on the homeward run. 
But while I slept, the crew began to parley: 
silver and gold, they guessed, were in that bag 
bestowed on me by Aiolos’ great heart; 
and one would glance at his benchmate and say: 
‘It never fails. He’s welcome everywhere: 
hail to the captain when he goes ashore! 
He brought along so many presents, plunder 
out of Troy, that’s it. How about ourselves— 
his shipmates all the way? Nigh home we are 
with empty hands. And who has gifts from Aiolos? 
He has. I say we ought to crack that bag, 
there’s gold and silver, plenty, in that bag!’ 
Temptation had its way with my companions, and they untied the 
bag. 
Then every wind 
roared into hurricane; the ships went pitching 
west with many cries; our land was lost. 
Roused up, despairing in that gloom, I thought: 
‘Should I go overside for a quick finish 
or clench my teeth and stay among the living?’ 
Down in the bilge I lay, pulling my sea cloak 
over my head, while the rough gale blew the ships 
and rueful crews clear back to Aiolia. 
We put ashore for water; then all hands 
gathered alongside for a mid-day meal. 
When we had taken bread and drink, I picked 
one soldier, and one herald, to go with me 
and called again on Aiolos. I found him 
at meat with his young princes and his lady, 
but there beside the pillars, in his portico, 
we sat down silent at the open door. 
The sight amazed them, and they all exclaimed: 
‘Why back again, Odysseus?’ 
‘What sea fiend 
rose in your path?’ 
‘Did we not launch you well 
for home, or for whatever land you chose?’ 
Out of my melancholy I replied: 
‘Mischief aboard and nodding at the titler— 
a damned drowse—did for me. Make good my loss, 
dear friends! You have the power!’ 
Gently I pleaded, 
but they turned cold and still. Said Father Aiolos: 
‘Take yourself out of this island, creeping thing— 
no law, no wisdom, lays it on me now 
to help a man the blessed gods detest— 
out! Your voyage here was cursed by heaven!’ 
He drove me from the place, groan as I would, 
and comfortless we went again to sea, 
days of it, till the men flagged at the oars— 
no breeze, no help in sight, by our own folly— 
six indistinguishable nights and days 
before we raised the Laistrygonian height 
and far stronghold of Lamos. In that land 
the daybreak follows dusk, and so the shepherd 
homing calls to the cowherd setting out; 
and he who never slept could earn two wages, 
tending oxen, pasturing silvery flocks, 
where the low night path of the sun is near 
the sun’s path by day. Here, then, we found 
a curious bay with mountain walls of stone 
to left and right, and reaching far inland,— 
a narrow entrance opening from the sea 
where cliffs converged as though to touch and close. 
All of my squadron sheltered here, inside 
the cavern of this bay. 
Black prow by prow 
those hulls were made fast in a limpid calm 
without a ripple, stillness all around them. 
My own black ship I chose to moor alone 
on the sea side, using a rock for bollard; 
and climbed a rocky point to get my bearings. 
No farms, no cultivated land appeared, 
but puffs of smoke rose in the wilderness; 
so I sent out two picked men and a herald 
to learn what race of men this land sustained. 
My party found a track—a wagon road 
for bringing wood down from the heights to town; 
and near the settlement they met a daughter 
of Antiphates the Laistrygon—a stalwart 
young girl taking her pail to Artakia, 
the fountain where these people go for water. 
My fellows hailed her, put their questions to her: 
who might the king be? ruling over whom? 
She waved her hand, showing her father’s lodge, 
so they approached it. In its gloom they saw 
a woman like a mountain crag, the queen— 
and loathed the sight of her. But she, for greeting, 
called from the meeting ground her lord and master, 
Antiphates, who came to drink their blood. 
He seized one man and tore him on the spot, 
making a meal of him; the other two 
leaped out of doors and ran to join the ships. 
Behind, he raised the whole tribe howling, countless 
Laistrygonés—and more than men they seemed, 
gigantic when they gathered on the sky line 
to shoot great boulders down from slings; and hell’s own 
crashing rose, and crying from the ships, 
as planks and men were smashed to bits—poor gobbets 
the wildmen speared like fish and bore away. 
But long before it ended in the anchorage— 
havoc and slaughter—I had drawn my sword 
and cut my own ship’s cable. ‘Men,’ I shouted, 
‘man the oars and pull till your hearts break 
if you would put this butchery behind!’ 
The oarsmen rent the sea in mortal fear 
and my ship spurted out of range, far out 
from that deep canyon where the rest were lost. 
So we fared onward and death fell behind, 
and we took breath to grieve for our companions. 
Our next landfall was on Aiaia, island 
of Kirké, dire beauty and divine, 
sister of baleful Aietes, like him 
fathered by Helios the light of mortals 
on Persé, child of the Ocean stream. 
We came 
washed in our silent ship upon her shore, 
and found a cove, a haven for the ship— 
some god, invisible, conned us in. We landed, 
to lie down in that place two days and nights, 
worn out and sick at heart, tasting our grief. 
But when Dawn set another day a-shining 
I took my spear and broadsword and I climbed 
a rocky point above the ship, for sight 
or sound of human labor. Gazing out 
from that high place over a land of thicket, 
oaks and wide watercourses, I could see 
a smoke wisp from the woodland hall of Kirké. 
So I took counsel with myself: should I 
go inland scouting out that reddish smoke? 
No: better not, I thought, but first return 
to waterside and ship, and give the men 
breakfast before I sent them to explore. 
Now as I went down quite alone, and came 
a bowshot from the ship, some god’s compassion 
set a big buck in motion to cross my path— 
a stag with noble antlers, pacing down 
from pasture in the woods to the riverside, 
as long thirst and the power of sun constrained him. 
He started from the bush and wheeled: I hit him 
square in the spine midway along his back 
and the bronze point broke through it. In the dust 
he fell and whinnied as life bled away. 
I set one foot against him, pulling hard 
to wrench my weapon from the wound, then left it, 
butt-end on the ground. I plucked some withies 
and twined a double strand into a rope— 
enough to tie the hocks of my huge trophy; 
then pickaback I lugged him to the ship, 
leaning on my long spearshaft; I could not 
haul that mighty carcass on one shoulder. 
Beside the ship I let him drop, and spoke 
gently and low to each man standing near: 
‘Come, friends, though hard beset, we’ll not go down 
into the House of Death before our time. 
As long as food and drink remain aboard 
let us rely on it, not die of hunger.’ 
At this those faces, cloaked in desolation 
upon the waste sea beach, were bared; 
their eyes turned toward me and the mighty trophy, 
lighting, foreseeing pleasure, one by one. 
So hands were washed to take what heaven sent us. 
And all that day until the sun went down 
we had our fill of venison and wine, 
till after sunset in the gathering dusk 
we Slept at last above the line of breakers. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
made heaven bright, I called them round and said: 
‘Shipmates, companions in disastrous time, 
O my dear friends, where Dawn lies, and the West, 
and where the great Sun, light of men, may go 
under the earth by night, and where he rises— 
of these things we know nothing. Do we know 
any least thing to serve us now? I wonder. 
All that I saw when I went up the rock 
was one more island in the boundless main, 
a low landscape, covered with woods and scrub, 
and puffs of smoke ascending in mid-forest.’ 
They were all silent, but their hearts contracted, 
remembering Antiphatés the Laistrygon 
and that prodigious cannibal, the Kyklops. 
They cried out, and the salt tears wet their eyes. 
But seeing our time for action lost in weeping, 
I mustered those Akhaians under arms, 
counting them off in two platoons, myself 
and my godlike Eurylokhos commanding. 
We shook lots in a soldier’s dogskin cap 
and his came bounding out—valiant Eurlokhos!— 
So off he went, with twenty-two companions 
weeping, as mine wept, too, who stayed behind. 
In the wild wood they found an open glade, 
around a smooth stone house—the hall of Kirké— 
and wolves and mountain lions lay there, mild 
in her soft spell, fed on her drug of evil. 
None would attack—oh, it was strange, I tell you— 
but switching their long tails they faced our men 
like hounds, who look up when their master comes 
with tidbits for them—as he will—from table. 
Humbly those wolves and lions with mighty paws 
fawned on our men—who met their yellow eyes 
and feared them. 
In the entrance way they stayed 
to listen there: inside her quiet house 
they heard the goddess Kirké. 
Low she sang 
in her beguiling voice, while on her loom 
she wove ambrosial fabric sheer and bright, 
by that craft known to the goddesses of heaven. 
No one would speak, until Polites—most 
faithful and likable of my officers, said: 
‘Dear friends, no need for stealth: here’s a young weaver 
singing a pretty song to set the air 
a-tingle on these lawns and paven courts. 
Goddess she is, or lady. Shall we greet her?’ 
So reassured, they all cried out together, 
and she came swiftly to the shining doors 
to call them in. All but Eurylokhos— 
who feared a snare—the innocents went after her. 
On thrones she seated them, and lounging chairs, 
while she prepared a meal of cheese and barley 
and amber honey mixed with Pramnian wine, 
adding her own vile pinch, to make them lose 
desire or thought of our dear father land. 
Scarce had they drunk when she flew after them 
with her long stick and shut them in a pigsty— 
bodies, voices, heads, and bristles, all 
swinish now, though minds were still unchanged. 
So, squealing, in they went. And Kirké tossed them 
acorns, mast, and cornel berries—fodder 
for hogs who rut and slumber on the earth. 
Down to the ship Eurylokhos came running 
to cry alarm, foul magic doomed his men! 
But working with dry lips to speak a word 
he could not, being so shaken; blinding tears 
welled in his eyes; foreboding filled his heart. 
When we were frantic questioning him, at last 
we heard the tale: our friends were gone. Said he: 
‘We went up through the oak scrub where you sent us, 
Odysseus, glory of commanders, 
until we found a palace in a glade, 
a marble house on open ground, and someone 
singing before her loom a chill, sweet song— 
goddess or girl, we could not tell. They hailed her, 
and then she stepped through shining doors and said, 
“Come, come in!” Like sheep they followed her, 
but I saw cruel deceit, and stayed behind. 
Then all our fellows vanished. Not a sound, 
and nothing stirred, although I watched for hours.’ 
When I heard this I slung my silver-hilted 
broadsword on, and shouldered my long bow, 
and said, ‘Come, take me back the way you came.’ 
But he put both his hands around my knees 
in desperate woe, and said in supplication: 
‘Not back there, O my lord! Oh, leave me here! 
You, even you, cannot return, I know it, 
I know you cannot bring away our shipmates; 
better make sail with these men, quickly too, 
and save ourselves from horror while we may.’ 
But I replied: 
‘By heaven, Eurylokhos, 
rest here then; take food and wine; 
stay in the black hull’s shelter. Let me go, 
as I see nothing for it but to go.’ 
I turned and left him, left the shore and ship, 
and went up through the woodland hushed and shady 
to find the subtle witch in her long hall. 
But Hermés met me, with his golden wand, 
barring the way—a boy whose lip was downy 
in the first bloom of manhood, so he seemed. 
He took my hand and spoke as though he knew me: 
‘Why take the inland path alone, 
poor seafarer, by hill and dale 
upon this island all unknown? 
Your friends are locked in Kirké’s pale; 
all are become like swine to see; 
and if you go to set them free 
you go to stay, and never more make sail 
for your old home upon Thaki. 
But I can tell you what to do 
to come unchanged from Kirké’s power 
and disenthrall your fighting crew: 
take with you to her bower 
as amulet, this plant I know— 
it will defeat her horrid show, 
so pure and potent is the flower; 
no mortal herb was ever so. 
Your cup with numbing drops of night 
and evil, stilled of all remorse, 
she will infuse to charm your sight; 
but this great herb with holy force 
will keep your mind and senses clear: 
when she turns cruel, coming near 
with her long stick to whip you out of doors, 
then let your cutting blade appear, 
Let instant death upon it shine, 
and she will cower and yield her bed— 
a pleasure you must not decline, 
so may her lust and fear bestead 
you and your friends, and break her spell; 
but make her swear by heaven and hell 
no witches’ tricks, or else, your harness shed, 
you'll be unmanned by her as well.’ 
He bent down glittering for the magic plant 
and pulled it up, black root and milky flower— 
a molii in the language of the gods— 
fatigue and pain for mortals to uproot; 
but gods do this, and everything, with ease. 
Then toward Olympos through the island trees 
Hermés departed, and I sought out Kirke, 
my heart high with excitement, beating hard. 
Before her mansion in the porch I stood 
to call her, all being still. Quick as a cat 
she opened her bright doors and sighed a welcome; 
then I strode after her with heavy heart 
down the long hall, and took the chair she gave me, 
silver-studded, intricately carved, 
made with a low footrest. The lady Kirké 
mixed me a golden cup of honeyed wine, 
adding in mischief her unholy drug. 
I drank, and the drink failed. But she came forward 
aiming a stroke with her long stick, and whispered: 
‘Down in the sty and snore among the rest!’ 
Without a word, I drew my sharpened sword 
and in one bound held it against her throat. 
She cried out, then slid under to take my knees, 
catching her breath to say, in her distress: 
‘What champion, of what country, can you be? 
Where are your kinsmen and your city? 
Are you not sluggish with my wine? Ah, wonder! 
Never a mortal man that drank this cup 
but when it passed his lips he had succumbed. 
Hale must your heart be and your tempered will. 
Odysseus then you are, O great contender, 
of whom the glittering god with golden wand 
spoke to me ever, and foretold 
the black swift ship would carry you from Troy. 
Put up your weapon in the sheath. We two 
shall mingle and make love upon our bed. 
So mutual trust may come of play and love.’ 
To this I said: 
‘Kirké, am I a boy, 
that you should make me soft and doting now? 
Here in this house you turned my men to swine; 
now it is I myself you hold, enticing 
into your chamber, to your dangerous bed, 
to take my manhood when you have me stripped. 
I mount no bed of love with you upon it. 
Or swear me first a great oath, if I do, 
you'll work no more enchantment to my harm.’ 
She swore at once, outright, as I demanded, 
and after she had sworn, and bound herself, 
I entered Kirké’s flawless bed of love. 
Presently in the hall her maids were busy, 
the nymphs who waited upon Kirké: four, 
whose cradles were in fountains, under boughs, 
or in the glassy seaward-gliding streams. 
One came with richly colored rugs to throw 
on seat and chairback, over linen covers; 
a second pulled the tables out, all silver, 
and loaded them with baskets all of gold; 
a third mixed wine as tawny-mild as honey 
in a bright bowl, and set out golden cups. 
The fourth came bearing water, and lit a blaze 
under a cauldron. By and by it bubbled, 
and when the dazzling brazen vessel seethed 
she filled a bathtub to my waist, and bathed me, 
pouring a soothing blend on head and shoulders, 
warming the soreness of my joints away. 
When she had done, and smoothed me with sweet oil, 
she put a tunic and a cloak around me 
and took me to a silver-studded chair 
with footrest, all elaborately carven. 
Now came a maid to tip a golden jug 
of water into a silver finger bowl, 
and draw a polished table to my side. 
The larder mistress brought her tray of loaves 
with many savory slices, and she gave 
the best, to tempt me. But no pleasure came; 
I huddled with my mind elsewhere, oppressed. 
Kirké regarded me, as there I sat 
disconsolate, and never touched a crust. 
Then she stood over me and chided me: 
‘Why sit at table mute, Odysseus? 
Are you mistrustful of my bread and drink? 
Can it be treachery that you fear again, 
after the gods’ great oath I swore for you?’ 
I turned to her at once, and said: 
‘Kirké, 
where is the captain who could bear to touch 
this banquet, in my place? A decent man 
would see his company before him first. 
Put heart in me to eat and drink—you may, 
by freeing my companions. I must see them.’ 
But Kirké had already turned away. 
Her long staff in her hand, she left the hall 
and opened up the sty. I saw her enter, 
driving those men turned swine to stand before me. 
She stroked them, each in turn, with some new chrism; 
and then, behold! their bristles fell away, 
the coarse pelt grown upon them by her drug 
melted away, and they were men again, 
younger, more handsome, taller than before. 
Their eyes upon me, each one took my hands, 
and wild regret and longing pierced them through, 
so the room rang with sobs, and even Kirké 
pitied that transformation. Exquisite 
the goddess looked as she stood near me, saying: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
go to the sea beach and sea-breasting ship; 
drag it ashore, full length upon the land; 
stow gear and stores in rock-holes under cover; 
return; be quick; bring all your dear companions.’ 
Now, being a man, I could not help consenting. 
So I went down to the sea beach and the ship, 
where I found all my other men on board, 
weeping, in despair along the benches. 
Sometimes in farmyards when the cows return 
well fed from pasture to the barn, one sees 
the pens give way before the calves in tumult, 
breaking through to cluster about their mothers, 
bumping together, bawling. Just that way 
my crew poured round me when they saw me come— 
their faces wet with tears as if they saw 
their homeland, and the crags of Ithaka, 
even the very town where they were born. 
And weeping still they all cried out in greeting: 
‘Prince, what joy this is, your safe return! 
Now Ithaka seems here, and we in Ithaka! 
But tell us now, what death befell our friends?’ 
And, speaking gently, I replied: 
‘First we must get the ship high on the shingle, 
and stow our gear and stores in clefts of rock 
for cover. Then come follow me, to see 
your shipmates in the magic house of Kirké 
eating and drinking, endlessly regaled.’ 
They turned back, as commanded, to this work; 
only one lagged, and tried to hold the others: 
Eurylokhos it was, who blurted out: 
‘Where now, poor remnants? is it devil’s work 
you long for? Will you go to Kirke’s hall? 
Swine, wolves, and lions she will make us all, 
beasts of her courtyard, bound by her enchantment. 
Remember those the Kyklops held, remember 
shipmates who made that visit with Odysseus! 
The daring man! They died for his foolishness!’ 
When I heard this I had a mind to draw 
the blade that swung against my side and chop him, 
bowling his head upon the ground—kinsman 
or no kinsman, close to me though he was. 
But others came between, saying, to stop me, 
‘Prince, we can leave him, if you say the word; 
let him stay here on guard. As for ourselves, 
show us the way to Kirke’s magic hall.’ 
So all turned inland, leaving shore and ship, 
and Eurylokhos—he, too, came on behind, 
fearing the rough edge of my tongue. Meanwhile 
at Kirké’s hands the rest were gently bathed, 
anointed with sweet oil, and dressed afresh 
in tunics and new cloaks with fleecy linings. 
We found them all at supper when we came. 
But greeting their old friends once more, the crew 
could not hold back their tears; and now again 
the rooms rang with sobs. Then Kirké, loveliest 
of all immortals, came to counsel me: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
enough of weeping fits. I know—I, too— 
what you endured upon the inhuman sea, 
what odds you met on land from hostile men. 
Remain with me, and share my meat and wine; 
restore behind your ribs those gallant hearts 
that served you in the old days, when you sailed 
from stony Ithaka. Now parched and spent, 
your cruel wandering is all you think of, 
never of joy, after so many blows.’ 
As we were men we could not help consenting. 
So day by day we lingered, feasting long 
on roasts and wine, until a year grew fat. 
But when the passing months and wheeling seasons 
brought the long summery days, the pause of summer, 
my shipmates one day summoned me and said: 
‘Captain, shake off this trance, and think of home— 
if home indeed awaits us, 
if we shall ever see 
your own well-timbered hall on Ithaka.’ 
They made me feel a pang, and I agreed. 
That day, and all day long, from dawn to sundown, 
we feasted on roast meat and ruddy wine, 
and after sunset when the dusk came on 
my men slept in the shadowy hall, but I 
went through the dark to Kirké’s flawless bed 
and took the goddess’ knees in supplication, 
urging, as she bent to hear: 
‘O Kirké, 
now you must keep your promise; it is time. 
Help me make sail for home. Day after day 
my longing quickens, and my company 
give me no peace, but wear my heart away 
pleading when you are not at hand to hear.’ 
The loveliest of goddesses replied: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
you shall not stay here longer against your will; 
but home you may not go 
unless you take a strange way round and come 
to the cold homes of Death and pale Perséphoné. 
You shall hear prophecy from the rapt shade 
of blind Teiresias of Thebes, forever 
charged with reason even among the dead; 
to him alone, of all the flitting ghosts, 
Perséphoné has given a mind undarkened.’ 
At this I felt a weight like stone within me, 
and, moaning, pressed my length against the bed, 
with no desire to see the daylight more. 
But when I had wept and tossed and had my fill 
of this despair, at last I answered her: 
‘Kirké, who pilots me upon this journey? 
No man has ever sailed to the land of Death.’ 
That loveliest of goddesses replied: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
feel no dismay because you lack a pilot; 
only set up your mast and haul your canvas 
to the fresh blowing North; sit down and steer, 
and hold that wind, even to the bourne of Ocean, 
Perséphoné’s deserted strand and grove, 
dusky with poplars and the drooping willow. 
Run through the tide-rip, bring your ship to shore, 
land there, and find the crumbling homes of Death. 
Here, toward the Sorrowing Water, run the streams 
of Wailing, out of Styx, and quenchless Burning— 
torrents that join in thunder at the Rock. 
Here then, great soldier, setting foot obey me: 
dig a well shaft a forearm square; pour out 
libations round it to the unnumbered dead: 
sweet milk and honey, then sweet wine, and last 
clear water, scattering handfulls of white barley. 
Pray now, with all your heart, to the faint dead; 
swear you will sacrifice your finest heifer, 
at home in Ithaka, and burn for them 
her tenderest parts in sacrifice; and vow 
to the lord Teirésias, apart from all, 
a black lamb, handsomest of all your flock— 
thus to appease the nations of the dead. 
Then slash a black ewe’s throat, and a black ram, 
facing the gloom of Erebos; but turn 
your head away toward Ocean. You shall see, now 
souls of the buried dead in shadowy hosts, 
and now you must call out to your companions 
to flay those sheep the bronze knife has cut down, 
for offerings, burnt flesh to those below, 
to sovereign Death and pale Persephone. 
Meanwhile draw sword from hip, crouch down, ward off 
the surging phantoms from the bloody pit 
until you know the presence of Teirésias. 
He will come soon, great captain; be it he 
who gives you course and distance for your sailing 
homeward across the cold fish-breeding sea.’ 
As the goddess ended, Dawn came stitched in gold. 
Now Kirke dressed me in my shirt and cloak, 
put on a gown of subtle tissue, silvery, 
then wound a golden belt about her waist 
and veiled her head in linen, 
while I went through the hall to rouse my crew. 
I bent above each one, and gently said: 
‘Wake from your sleep: no more sweet slumber. Come, 
we Sail: the Lady Kirké so ordains it.’ 
They were soon up, and ready at that word; 
but I was not to take my men unharmed 
from this place, even from this. Among them all 
the youngest was Elpénor— 
no mainstay in a fight nor very clever— 
and this one, having climbed on Kirké’s roof 
to taste the cool night, fell asleep with wine. 
Waked by our morning voices, and the tramp 
of men below, he started up, but missed 
his footing on the long steep backward ladder 
and fell that height headlong. The blow smashed 
the nape cord, and his ghost fled to the dark. 
But I was outside, walking with the rest, 
saying: 
‘Homeward you think we must be sailing 
to our own land; no, elsewhere is the voyage 
Kirke has laid upon me. We must go 
to the cold homes of Death and pale Perséphoné 
to hear Teiresias tell of time to come.’ 
They felt so stricken, upon hearing this, 
they sat down wailing loud, and tore their hair. 
But nothing came of giving way to grief. 
Down to the shore and ship at last we went, 
bowed with anguish, cheeks all wet with tears, 
to find that Kirké had been there before us 
and tied nearby a black ewe and a ram: 
she had gone by like air. 
For who could see the passage of a goddess 
unless she wished his mortal eyes aware? 


BOOK 11

We bore down on the ship at the sea’s edge 
and launched her on the salt immortal sea, 
stepping our mast and spar in the black ship; 
embarked the ram and ewe and went aboard 
in tears, with bitter and sore dread upon us. 
But now a breeze came up for us astern— 
a canvas-bellying landbreeze, hale shipmate 
sent by the singing nymph with sun-bright hair; 
so we made fast the braces, took our thwarts, 
and let the wind and steersman work the ship 
with full sail spread all day above our coursing, 
till the sun dipped, and all the ways grew dark 
upon the fathomless unresting sea. 
By night 
our ship ran onward toward the Ocean’s bourne, 
the realm and region of the Men of Winter, 
hidden in mist and cloud. Never the flaming 
eye of Hélios lights on those men 
at morning, when he climbs the sky of stars, 
nor in descending earthward out of heaven; 
ruinous night being rove over those wretches. 
We made the land, put ram and ewe ashore, 
and took our way along the Ocean stream 
to find the place foretold for us by Kirké. 
There Perimédés and Eurylokhos 
pinioned the sacred beasts. With my drawn blade 
I spaded up the votive pit, and poured 
libations round it to the unnumbered dead: 
sweet milk and honey, then sweet wine, and last 
clear water; and I scattered barley down. 
Then I addressed the blurred and breathless dead, 
vowing to slaughter my best heifer for them 
before she calved, at home in Ithaka, 
and burn the choice bits on the altar fire; 
as for Teirésias, I swore to sacrifice 
a black lamb, handsomest of all our flock. 
Thus to assuage the nations of the dead 
I pledged these rites, then slashed the lamb and ewe, 
letting their black blood stream into the wellpit. 
Now the souls gathered, stirring out of Erebos, 
brides and young men, and men grown old in pain, 
and tender girls whose hearts were new to grief; 
many were there, too, torn by brazen lanceheads, 
battle-slain, bearing still their bloody gear. 
From every side they came and sought the pit 
with rustling cries; and I grew sick with fear. 
But presently I gave command to my officers 
to flay those sheep the bronze cut down, and make 
burnt offerings of flesh to the gods below— 
to sovereign Death, to pale Persephone. 
Meanwhile I crouched with my drawn sword to keep 
the surging phantoms from the bloody pit 
till I should know the presence of Teirésias. 
One shade came first—Elpénor, of our company, 
who lay unburied still on the wide earth 
as we had left him—dead in Kirké’s hall, 
untouched, unmourned, when other cares compelled us. 
Now when I saw him there I wept for pity 
and called out to him: 
‘How is this, Elpénor, 
how could you journey to the western gloom 
swifter afoot than I in the black lugger?’ 
He sighed, and answered: 
‘Son of great Laértés, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
bad luck shadowed me, and no kindly power; 
ignoble death I drank with so much wine. 
I slept on Kirké’s roof, then could not see 
the long steep backward ladder, coming down, 
and fell that height. My neck bone, buckled under, 
snapped, and my spirit found this well of dark. 
Now hear the grace I pray for, in the name 
of those back in the world, not here—your wife 
and father, he who gave you bread in childhood, 
and your own child, your only son, Telémakhos, 
long ago left at home. 
When you make sail 
and put these lodgings of dim Death behind, 
you will moor ship, I know, upon Aiaia Island; 
there, O my lord, remember me, I pray, 
do not abandon me unwept, unburied, 
to tempt the gods’ wrath, while you sail for home; 
but fire my corpse, and all the gear I had, 
and build a cairn for me above the breakers— 
an unknown sailor’s mark for men to come. 
Heap up the mound there, and implant upon it 
the oar I pulled in life with my companions.’ 
He ceased, and I replied: 
‘Unhappy spirit, 
I promise you the barrow and the burial.’ 
So we conversed, and grimly, at a distance, 
with my long sword between, guarding the blood, 
while the faint image of the lad spoke on. 
Now came the soul of Antikleia, dead, 
my mother, daughter of Autélykos, 
dead now, though living still when I took ship 
for holy Troy. Seeing this ghost I grieved, 
but held her off, through pang on pang of tears, 
till I should know the presence of Teiresias. 
Soon from the dark that prince of Thebes came forward 
bearing a golden staff; and he addressed me: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
why leave the blazing sun, O man of woe, 
to see the cold dead and the joyless region? 
Stand clear, put up your sword; 
let me but taste of blood, I shall speak true.’ 
At this I stepped aside, and in the scabbard 
let my long sword ring home to the pommel silver, 
as he bent down to the sombre blood. Then spoke 
the prince of those with gift of speech: 
‘Great captain, 
a fair wind and the honey lights of home 
are all you seek. But anguish lies ahead; 
the god who thunders on the land prepares it, 
not to be shaken from your track, implacable, 
in rancor for the son whose eye you blinded. 
One narrow strait may take you through his blows: 
denial of yourself, restraint of shipmates. 
When you make landfall on Thrinakia first 
and quit the violet sea, dark on the land 
you'll find the grazing herds of Helios 
by whom all things are seen, all speech is known. 
Avoid those kine, hold fast to your intent, 
and hard seafaring brings you all to Ithaka. 
But if you raid the beeves, I see destruction 
for ship and crew. Though you survive alone, 
bereft of all companions, lost for years, 
under strange sail shall you come home, to find 
your own house filled with trouble: insolent men 
eating your livestock as they court your lady. 
Aye, you shall make those men atone in blood! 
But after you have dealt out death—in open 
combat or by stealth—to all the suitors, 
go overland on foot, and take an oar, 
until one day you come where men have lived 
with meat unsalted, never known the sea, 
nor seen seagoing ships, with crimson bows 
and oars that fledge light hulls for dipping flight. 
The spot will soon be plain to you, and I 
can tell you how: some passerby will say, 
“What winnowing fan is that upon your shoulder?” 
Halt, and implant your smooth oar in the turf 
and make fair sacrifice to Lord Poseidon: 
a ram, a bull, a great buck boar; turn back, 
and carry out pure hekatombs at home 
to all wide heaven’s lords, the undying gods, 
to each in order. Then a seaborne death 
soft as this hand of mist will come upon you 
when you are wearied out with rich old age, 
your country folk in blessed peace around you. 
And all this shall be just as I foretell.’ 
When he had done, I said at once, 
‘Teirésias, 
my life runs on then as the gods have spun it. 
But come, now, tell me this; make this thing clear: 
I see my mother’s ghost among the dead 
sitting in silence near the blood. Not once 
has she glanced this way toward her son, nor spoken. 
Tell me, my lord, 
may she in some way come to know my presence?’ 
To this he answered: 
‘I shall make it clear 
in a few words and simply. Any dead man 
whom you allow to enter where the blood is 
will speak to you, and speak the truth; but those 
deprived will grow remote again and fade.’ 
When he had prophesied, Teiresias’ shade 
retired lordly to the halls of Death; 
but I stood fast until my mother stirred, 
moving to sip the black blood; then she knew me 
and called out sorrowfully to me: 
‘Child, 
how could you cross alive into this gloom 
at the world’s end?—No sight for living eyes; 
great currents run between, desolate waters, 
the Ocean first, where no man goes a journey 
without ship’s timber under him. 
Say, now, 
is it from Troy, still wandering, after years, 
that you come here with ship and company? 
Have you not gone at all to Ithaka? 
Have you not seen your lady in your hall?’ 
She put these questions, and I answered her: 
‘Mother, I came here, driven to the land of death 
in want of prophecy from Teiresias’ shade; 
nor have I yet coasted Akhaia’s hills 
nor touched my own land, but have had hard roving 
since first I joined Lord Agamémnon’s host 
by sea for Ilion, the wild horse country, 
to fight the men of Troy. 
But come now, tell me this, and tell me clearly, 
what was the bane that pinned you down in Death? 
Some ravaging long illness, or mild arrows 
a-flying down one day from Artemis? 
Tell me of Father, tell me of the son 
I left behind me; have they still my place, 
my honors, or have other men assumed them? 
Do they not say that I shall come no more? 
And tell me of my wife: how runs her thought, 
still with her child, still keeping our domains, 
or bride again to the best of the Akhaians?’ 
To this my noble mother quickly answered: 
‘Still with her child indeed she is, poor heart, 
still in your palace hall. Forlorn her nights 
and days go by, her life used up in weeping. 
But no man takes your honored place. Telémakhos 
has care of all your garden plots and fields, 
and holds the public honor of a magistrate, 
feasting and being feasted. But your father 
is country bound and comes to town no more. 
He owns no bedding, rugs, or fleecy mantles, 
but lies down, winter nights, among the slaves, 
rolled in old cloaks for cover, near the embers. 
Or when the heat comes at the end of summer, 
the fallen leaves, all round his vineyard plot, 
heaped into windrows, make his lowly bed. 
He lies now even so, with aching heart, 
and longs for your return, while age comes on him. 
So I, too, pined away, so doom befell me, 
not that the keen-eyed huntress with her shafts 
had marked me down and shot to kill me; not 
that illness overtook me—no true illness 
wasting the body to undo the spirit; 
only my loneliness for you, Odysseus, 
for your kind heart and counsel, gentle Odysseus, 
took my own life away.’ 
I bit my lip, 
rising perplexed, with longing to embrace her, 
and tried three times, putting my arms around her, 
but she went sifting through my hands, impalpable 
as shadows are, and wavering like a dream. 
Now this embittered all the pain I bore, 
and I cried in the darkness: 
‘O my mother, 
will you not stay, be still, here in my arms, 
may we not, in this place of Death, as well, 
hold one another, touch with love, and taste 
salt tears’ relief, the twinge of welling tears? 
Or is this all hallucination, sent 
against me by the iron queen, Persephone, 
to make me groan again?’ 
My noble mother 
answered quickly: 
‘O my child—alas, 
most sorely tried of men—great Zeus’s daughter, 
Persephone, knits no illusion for you. 
All mortals meet this judgment when they die. 
No flesh and bone are here, none bound by sinew, 
since the bright-hearted pyre consumed them down— 
the white bones long exanimate—to ash; 
dreamlike the soul flies, insubstantial. 
You must crave sunlight soon. 
Note all things strange 
seen here, to tell your lady in after days.’ 
So went our talk; then other shadows came, 
ladies in company, sent by Perséphoné— 
consorts or daughters of illustrious men— 
crowding about the black blood. 
I took thought 
how best to separate and question them, 
and saw no help for it, but drew once more 
the long bright edge of broadsword from my hip, 
that none should sip the blood in company 
but one by one, in order; so it fell 
that each declared her lineage and name. 
Here was great loveliness of ghosts! I saw 
before them all, that princess of great ladies, 
Tyro, Salmoneus’ daughter, as she told me, 
and queen to Krétheus, a son of Aiolos. 
She had gone daft for the river Enipeus, 
most graceful of all running streams, and ranged 
all day by Enipeus’ limpid side, 
whose form the foaming girdler of the islands, 
the god who makes earth tremble, took and so 
lay down with her where he went flooding seaward, 
their bower a purple billow, arching round 
to hide them in a sea-vale, god and lady. 
Now when his pleasure was complete, the god 
spoke to her softly, holding fast her hand: 
‘Dear mortal, go in joy! At the turn of seasons, 
winter to summer, you shall bear me sons; 
no lovemaking of gods can be in vain. 
Nurse our sweet children tenderly, and rear them. 
Home with you now, and hold your tongue, and tell 
no one your lover’s name—though I am yours, 
Poseidon, lord of surf that makes earth tremble.’ 
He plunged away into the deep sea swell, 
and she grew big with Pelias and Neleus, 
powerful vassals, in their time, of Zeus. 
Pelias lived on broad Iolkos seaboard 
rich in flocks, and Neleus at Pylos. 
As for the sons borne by that queen of women 
to Krétheus, their names were Aison, Pherés, 
and Amythaon, expert charioteer. 
Next after her I saw Antiopé, 
daughter of Asopos. She too could boast 
a god for lover, having lain with Zeus 
and borne two sons to him: Amphion and 
Zethos, who founded Thebes, the upper city, 
and built the ancient citadel. They sheltered 
no life upon that plain, for all their power, 
without a fortress wall. 
And next I saw 
Amphitrion’s true wife, Alkméné, mother, 
as all men know, of lionish Heraklés, 
conceived when she lay close in Zeus’s arms; 
and Megaré, high-hearted Kreon’s daughter, 
wife of Amphitrion’s unwearying son. 
I saw the mother of Oidipous, Epikasté, 
whose great unwitting deed it was 
to marry her own son. He took that prize 
from a slain father; presently the gods 
brought all to light that made the famous story. 
But by their fearsome wills he kept his throne 
in dearest Thebes, all through his evil days, 
while she descended to the place of Death, 
god of the locked and iron door. Steep down 
from a high rafter, throttled in her noose, 
she swung, carried away by pain, and left him 
endless agony from a mother’s Furies. 
And I saw Khloris, that most lovely lady, 
whom for her beauty in the olden time 
Neleus wooed with countless gifts, and married. 
She was the youngest daughter of Amphion, 
son of Iasos. In those days he held 
power at Orkhémenos, over the Minyai. 
At Pylos then as queen she bore her children— 
Nestor, Khromios, Periklymenos, 
and Pero, too, who turned the heads of men 
with her magnificence. A host of princes 
from nearby lands came courting her; but Neleus 
would hear of no one, not unless the suitor 
could drive the steers of giant Iphiklos 
from Phylaké—longhorns, broad in the brow, 
so fierce that one man only, a diviner, 
offered to round them up. But bitter fate 
saw him bound hand and foot by savage herdsmen. 
Then days and months grew full and waned, the year 
went wheeling round, the seasons came again, 
before at last the power of Iphiklos, 
relenting, freed the prisoner, who foretold 
all things to him. So Zeus’s will was done. 
And I saw Leda, wife of Tyndareus, 
upon whom Tyndareus had sired twins 
indomitable: Kastor, tamer of horses, 
and Polydeukés, best in the boxing ring. 
Those two live still, though life-creating earth 
embraces them: even in the underworld 
honored as gods by Zeus, each day in turn 
one comes alive, the other dies again. 
Then after Léda to my vision came 
the wife of Aloeus, Iphimedeia, 
proud that she once had held the flowing sea 
and borne him sons, thunderers for a day, 
the world-renowned Otos and Ephialtés. 
Never were men on such a scale 
bred on the plowlands and the grainlands, never 
so magnificent any, after Orion. 
At nine years old they towered nine fathoms tall, 
nine cubits in the shoulders, and they promised 
furor upon Olympos, heaven broken by battle cries, 
the day they met the gods in arms. 
With Ossa’s 
mountain peak they meant to crown Olympos 
and over Ossa Pelion’s forest pile 
for footholds up the sky. As giants grown 
they might have done it, but the bright son of Zeus 
by Leto of the smooth braid shot them down 
while they were boys unbearded; no dark curls 
clustered yet from temples to the chin. 
Then I saw Phaidra, Prokris; and Ariadné, 
daughter of Minos, the grim king. Theseus took her 
aboard with him from Krete for the terraced land 
of ancient Athens; but he had no joy of her. 
Artemis killed her on the Isle of Dia 
at a word from Dionysos. 
Maira, then, 
and Klyméné, and that detested queen, 
Eriphylé, who betrayed her lord for gold ... 
but how name all the women I beheld there, 
daughters and wives of kings? The starry night 
wanes long before I close. 
Here, or aboard ship, 
amid the crew, the hour for sleep has come. 
Our sailing is the gods’ affair and yours.” 
Then he fell silent. Down the shadowy hall 
the enchanted banqueters were still. Only 
the queen with ivory pale arms, Arété, spoke, 
saying to all the silent men: 
“Phaiakians, 
how does he stand, now, in your eyes, this captain, 
the look and bulk of him, the inward poise? 
He is my guest, but each one shares that honor. 
Be in no haste to send him on his way 
or scant your bounty in his need. Remember 
how rich, by heaven’s will, your possessions are.” 
Then Ekhenéos, the old soldier, eldest 
of all Phaidkians, added his word: 
“Friends, here was nothing but our own thought spoken, 
the mark hit square. Our duties to her majesty. 
For what is to be said and done, 
we wait upon Alkinoéds’ command.” 
At this the king’s voice rang: 
“T so command— 
as sure as it is I who, while I live, 
rule the sea rovers of Phaiadkia. Our friend 
longs to put out for home, but let him be 
content to rest here one more day, until 
I see all gifts bestowed. And every man 
will take thought for his launching and his voyage, 
I most of all, for I am master here.” 
Odysseus, the great tactician, answered: 
“Alkinoés, king and admiration of men, 
even a year’s delay, if you should urge it, 
in loading gifts and furnishing for sea— 
I too could wish it; better far that I 
return with some largesse of wealth about me— 
I shall be thought more worthy of love and courtesy 
by every man who greets me home in Ithaka.” 
The king said: 
“As to that, one word, Odysseus: 
from all we see, we take you for no swindler— 
though the dark earth be patient of so many, 
scattered everywhere, baiting their traps with lies 
of old times and of places no one knows. 
You speak with art, but your intent is honest. 
The Argive troubles, and your own troubles, 
you told as a poet would, a man who knows the world. 
But now come tell me this: among the dead 
did you meet any of your peers, companions 
who sailed with you and met their doom at Troy? 
Here’s a long night—an endless night—before us, 
and no time yet for sleep, not in this hall. 
Recall the past deeds and the strange adventures. 
I could stay up until the sacred Dawn 
as long as you might wish to tell your story.” 
Odysseus the great tactician answered: 
“Alkinoés, king and admiration of men, 
there is a time for story telling; there is 
also a time for sleep. But even so, 
if, indeed, listening be still your pleasure, 
I must not grudge my part. Other and sadder 
tales there are to tell, of my companions, 
of some who came through all the Trojan spears, 
clangor and groan of war, 
only to find a brutal death at home— 
and a bad wife behind it. 
After Perséphoné, 
icy and pale, dispersed the shades of women, 
the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, 
came before me, sombre in the gloom, 
and others gathered round, all who were with him 
when death and doom struck in Aegisthos’ hall. 
Sipping the black blood, the tall shade perceived me, 
and cried out sharply, breaking into tears; 
then tried to stretch his hands toward me, but could not, 
being bereft of all the reach and power 
he once felt in the great torque of his arms. 
Gazing at him, and stirred, I wept for pity, 
and spoke across to him: 
‘O son of Atreus, 
illustrious Lord Marshal, Agamemnon, 
what was the doom that brought you low in death? 
Were you at sea, aboard ship, and Poseidon 
blew up a wicked squall to send you under, 
or were you cattle-raiding on the mainland 
or in a fight for some strongpoint, or women, 
when the foe hit you to your mortal hurt?’ 
But he replied at once: 
‘Son of Laértés, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
neither did I go down with some good ship 
in any gale Poseidon blew, nor die 
upon the mainland, hurt by foes in battle. 
It was Aigisthos who designed my death, 
he and my heartless wife, and killed me, after 
feeding me, like an ox felled at the trough. 
That was my miserable end—and with me 
my fellows butchered, like so many swine 
killed for some troop, or feast, or wedding banquet 
in a great landholder’s household. In your day 
you have seen men, and hundreds, die in war, 
in the bloody press, or downed in single combat, 
but these were murders you would catch your breath at: 
think of us fallen, all our throats cut, winebowl 
brimming, tables laden on every side, 
while blood ran smoking over the whole floor. 
In my extremity I heard Kassandra, 
Priam’s daughter, piteously crying 
as the traitress Klytaimnéstra made to kill her 
along with me. I heaved up from the ground 
and got my hands around the blade, but she 
eluded me, that whore. Nor would she close 
my two eyes as my soul swam to the underworld 
or shut my lips. There is no being more fell, 
more bestial than a wife in such an action, 
and what an action that one planned! 
The murder of her husband and her lord. 
Great god, I thought my children and my slaves 
at least would give me welcome. But that woman, 
plotting a thing so low, defiled herself 
and all her sex, all women yet to come, 
even those few who may be virtuous.’ 
He paused then, and I answered: 
‘Foul and dreadful. 
That was the way that Zeus who views the wide world 
vented his hatred on the sons of Atreus— 
intrigues of women, even from the start. 
Myriads 
died by Helen’s fault, and Klytaimnéstra 
plotted against you half the world away.’ 
And he at once said: 
‘Let it be a warning 
even to you. Indulge a woman never, 
and never tell her all you know. Some things 
a man may tell, some he should cover up. 
Not that I see a risk for you, Odysseus, 
of death at your wife’s hands. She is too wise, 
too clear-eyed, sees alternatives too well, 
Penélopé, Ikarios’ daughter— 
that young bride whom we left behind—think of it!— 
when we sailed off to war. The baby boy 
still cradled at her breast—now he must be 
a grown man, and a lucky one. By heaven, 
you'll see him yet, and he’ll embrace his father 
with old fashioned respect, and rightly. 
My own 
lady never let me glut my eyes 
on my own son, but bled me to death first. 
One thing I will advise, on second thought; 
stow it away and ponder it. 
Land your ship 
in secret on your island; give no warning. 
The day of faithful wives is gone forever. 
But tell me, have you any word at all 
about my son’s life? Gone to Orkhémenos 
or sandy Pylos, can he be? Or waiting 
with Menelaos in the plain of Sparta? 
Death on earth has not yet taken Orestes.’ 
But I could only answer: 
‘Son of Atreus, 
why do you ask these questions of me? Neither 
news of home have I, nor news of him, 
alive or dead. And empty words are evil.’ 
So we exchanged our speech, in bitterness, 
weighed down by grief, and tears welled in our eyes, 
when there appeared the spirit of Akhilleus, 
son of Peleus; then Patréklos’ shade, 
and then Antilokhos, and then Aias, 
first among all the Danaans in strength 
and bodily beauty, next to prince Akhilleus. 
Now that great runner, grandson of Aiakhos, 
recognized me and called across to me: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
old knife, what next? What greater feat remains 
for you to put your mind on, after this? 
How did you find your way down to the dark 
where these dimwitted dead are camped forever, 
the after images of used-up men?’ 
I answered: 
‘Akhilleus, Peleus’ son, strongest of all 
among the Akhaians, I had need of foresight 
such as Teirésias alone could give 
to help me, homeward bound for the crags of Ithaka. 
I have not yet coasted Akhaia, not yet 
touched my land; my life is all adversity. 
But was there ever a man more blest by fortune 
than you, Akhilleus? Can there ever be? 
We ranked you with immortals in your lifetime, 
we Argives did, and here your power is royal 
among the dead men’s shades. Think, then, Akhilleus: 
you need not be so pained by death.’ 
To this 
he answered swiftly: 
‘Let me hear no smooth talk 
of death from you, Odysseus, light of councils. 
Better, I say, to break sod as a farm hand 
for some poor country man, on iron rations, 
than lord it over all the exhausted dead. 
Tell me, what news of the prince my son: did he 
come after me to make a name in battle 
or could it be he did not? Do you know 
if rank and honor still belong to Peleus 
in the towns of the Myrmidons? Or now, may be, 
Hellas and Phthia spurn him, seeing old age 
fetters him, hand and foot. I cannot help him 
under the sun’s rays, cannot be that man 
I was on Troy’s wide seaboard, in those days 
when I made bastion for the Argives 
and put an army’s best men in the dust. 
Were I but whole again, could I go now 
to my father’s house, one hour would do to make 
my passion and my hands no man could hold 
hateful to any who shoulder him aside.’ 
Now when he paused I answered: 
‘Of all that— 
of Peleus’ life, that is—I know nothing; 
but happily I can tell you the whole story 
of Neoptólemos, as you require. 
In my own ship I brought him out from Skyros 
to join the Akhaians under arms. 
And I can tell you, 
in every council before Troy thereafter 
your son spoke first and always to the point; 
no one but Nestor and I could out-debate him. 
And when we formed against the Trojan line 
he never hung back in the mass, but ranged 
far forward of his troops—no man could touch him 
for gallantry. Aye, scores went down before him 
in hard fights man to man. I shall not tell 
all about each, or name them all—the long 
roster of enemies he put out of action, 
taking the shock of charges on the Argives. 
But what a champion his lance ran through 
in Eurypulos the son of Télephos! Keteians 
in throngs around that captain also died— 
all because Priam’s gifts had won his mother 
to send the lad to battle; and I thought 
Memnon alone in splendor ever outshone him. 
But one fact more: while our picked Argive crew 
still rode that hollow horse Epeios built, 
and when the whole thing lay with me, to open 
the trapdoor of the ambuscade or not, 
at that point our Danaan lords and soldiers 
wiped their eyes, and their knees began to quake, 
all but Neoptólemos. I never saw 
his tanned cheek change color or his hand 
brush one tear away. Rather he prayed me, 
hand on hilt, to sortie, and he gripped 
his tough spear, bent on havoc for the Trojans. 
And when we had pierced and sacked Priam’s tall city 
he loaded his choice plunder and embarked 
with no scar on him; not a spear had grazed him 
nor the sword’s edge in close work—common wounds 
one gets in war. Ares in his mad fits 
knows no favorites.’ 
But I said no more, 
for he had gone off striding the field of asphodel, 
the ghost of our great runner, Akhilleus Aiakides, 
glorying in what I told him of his son. 
Now other souls of mournful dead stood by, 
each with his troubled questioning, but one 
remained alone, apart: the son of Telamon, 
Aias, it was—the great shade burning still 
because I had won favor on the beachhead 
in rivalry over Akhilleus’ arms. 
The Lady Thetis, mother of Akhilleus, 
laid out for us the dead man’s battle gear, 
and Trojan children, with Athena, 
named the Danaan fittest to own them. Would 
god I had not borne the palm that day! 
For earth took Aias then to hold forever, 
the handsomest and, in all feats of war, 
noblest of the Danaans after Akhilleus. 
Gently therefore I called across to him: 
‘Aias, dear son of royal Télamon, 
you would not then forget, even in death, 
your fury with me over those accurst 
calamitous arms?—and so they were, a bane 
sent by the gods upon the Argive host. 
For when you died by your own hand we lost 
a tower, formidable in war. All we Akhaians 
mourn you forever, as we do Akhilleus; 
and no one bears the blame but Zeus. 
He fixed that doom for you because he frowned 
on the whole expedition of our spearmen. 
My lord, come nearer, listen to our story! 
Conquer your indignation and your pride.’ 
But he gave no reply, and turned away, 
following other ghosts toward Erebos. 
Who knows if in that darkness he might still 
have spoken, and I answered? 
But my heart 
longed, after this, to see the dead elsewhere. 
And now there came before my eyes Minos, 
the son of Zeus, enthroned, holding a golden staff, 
dealing out justice among ghostly pleaders 
arrayed about the broad doorways of Death. 
And then I glimpsed Orion, the huge hunter, 
gripping his club, studded with bronze, unbreakable, 
with wild beasts he had overpowered in life 
on lonely mountainsides, now brought to bay 
on fields of asphodel. 
And I saw Tityos, 
the son of Gaia, lying 
abandoned over nine square rods of plain. 
Vultures, hunched above him, left and right, 
rifling his belly, stabbed into the liver, 
and he could never push them off. 
This hulk 
had once committed rape of Zeus’s mistress, 
Léto, in her glory, when she crossed 
the open grass of Panopeus toward Pytho. 
Then I saw Tantalos put to the torture: 
in a cool pond he stood, lapped round by water 
clear to the chin, and being athirst he burned 
to slake his dry weasand with drink, though drink 
he would not ever again. For when the old man 
put his lips down to the sheet of water 
it vanished round his feet, gulped underground, 
and black mud baked there in a wind from hell. 
Boughs, too, drooped low above him, big with fruit, 
pear trees, pomegranates, brilliant apples, 
luscious figs, and olives ripe and dark; 
but if he stretched his hand for one, the wind 
under the dark sky tossed the bough beyond him. 
Then Sisyphos in torment I beheld 
being roustabout to a tremendous boulder. 
Leaning with both arms braced and legs driving, 
he heaved it toward a height, and almost over, 
but then a Power spun him round and sent 
the cruel boulder bounding again to the plain. 
Whereon the man bent down again to toil, 
dripping sweat, and the dust rose overhead. 
Next I saw manifest the power of Heraklés— 
a phantom, this, for he himself has gone 
feasting amid the gods, reclining soft 
with Hebe of the ravishing pale ankles, 
daughter of Zeus and Hera, shod in gold. 
But, in my vision, all the dead around him 
cried like affrighted birds; like Night itself 
he loomed with naked bow and nocked arrow 
and glances terrible as continual archery. 
My hackles rose at the gold swordbelt he wore 
sweeping across him: gorgeous intaglio 
of savage bears, boars, lions with wildfire eyes, 
swordfights, battle, slaughter, and sudden death— 
the smith who had that belt in him, I hope 
he never made, and never will make, another. 
The eyes of the vast figure rested on me, 
and of a sudden he said in kindly tones: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
under a cloud, you too? Destined to grinding 
labors like my own in the sunny world? 
Son of Kronion Zeus or not, how many 
days I sweated out, being bound in servitude 
to a man far worse than I, a rough master! 
He made me hunt this place one time 
to get the watchdog of the dead: no more 
perilous task, he thought, could be; but I 
brought back that beast, up from the underworld; 
Hermes and grey-eyed Athena showed the way.’ 
And Heraklés, down the vistas of the dead, 
faded from sight; but I stood fast, awaiting 
other great souls who perished in times past. 
I should have met, then, god-begotten Theseus 
and Peirithoés, whom both I longed to see, 
but first came shades in thousands, rustling 
in a pandemonium of whispers, blown together, 
and the horror took me that Perséphoné 
had brought from darker hell some saurian death’s head. 
I whirled then, made for the ship, shouted to crewmen 
to get aboard and cast off the stern hawsers, 
an order soon obeyed. They took their thwarts, 
and the ship went leaping toward the stream of Ocean 
first under oars, then with a following wind. 


BOOK 12

The ship sailed on, out of the Ocean Stream, 
riding a long swell on the open sea 
for the Island of Aiaia. 
Summering Dawn 
has dancing grounds there, and the Sun his rising; 
but still by night we beached on a sand shelf 
and waded in beyond the line of breakers 
to fall asleep, awaiting the Day Star. 
When the young Dawn with finger tips of rose 
made heaven bright, I sent shipmates to bring 
Elpénor’s body from the house of Kirke. 
We others cut down timber on the foreland, 
on a high point, and built his pyre of logs, 
then stood by weeping while the flame burnt through 
corse and equipment. 
Then we heaped his barrow, 
lifting a gravestone on the mound, and fixed 
his light but unwarped oar against the sky. 
These were our rites in memory of him. Soon, then, 
knowing us back from the Dark Land, Kirké came 
freshly adorned for us, with handmaids bearing 
loaves, roast meats, and ruby-colored wine. 
She stood among us in immortal beauty 
jesting: 
‘Hearts of oak, did you go down 
alive into the homes of Death? One visit 
finishes all men but yourselves, twice mortal! 
Come, here is meat and wine, enjoy your feasting 
for one whole day; and in the dawn tomorrow 
you shall put out to sea. Sailing directions, 
landmarks, perils, I shall sketch for you, to keep you 
from being caught by land or water 
in some black sack of trouble.’ 
In high humor 
and ready for carousal, we agreed; 
so all that day until the sun went down 
we feasted on roast meat and good red wine, 
till after sunset, at the fall of night, 
the men dropped off to sleep by the stern hawsers. 
She took my hand then, silent in that hush, 
drew me apart, made me sit down, and lay 
beside me, softly questioning, as I told 
all I had seen, from first to last. 
Then said the Lady Kirké: 
‘So: all those trials are over. 
Listen with care 
to this, now, and a god will arm your mind. 
Square in your ship’s path are Seirenes, crying 
beauty to bewitch men coasting by; 
woe to the innocent who hears that sound! 
He will not see his lady nor his children 
in joy, crowding about him, home from sea; 
the Seirenes will sing his mind away 
on their sweet meadow lolling. There are bones 
of dead men rotting in a pile beside them 
and flayed skins shrivel around the spot. 
Steer wide; 
keep well to seaward; plug your oarsmen’s ears 
with beeswax kneaded soft; none of the rest 
should hear that song. 
But if you wish to listen, 
let the men tie you in the lugger, hand 
and foot, back to the mast, lashed to the mast, 
so you may hear those harpies’ thrilling voices; 
shout as you will, begging to be untied, 
your crew must only twist more line around you 
and keep their stroke up, till the singers fade. 
What then? One of two courses you may take, 
and you yourself must weigh them. I shall not 
plan the whole action for you now, but only 
tell you of both. 
Ahead are beetling rocks 
and dark blue glancing Amphitrite, surging, 
roars around them. Prowling Rocks, or Drifters, 
the gods in bliss have named them—named them well. 
Not even birds can pass them by, not even 
the timorous doves that bear ambrosia 
to Father Zeus; caught by downdrafts, they die 
on rockwall smooth as ice. 
Each time, the Father 
wafts a new courier to make up his crew. 
Still less can ships get searoom of these Drifters, 
whose boiling surf, under high fiery winds, 
carries tossing wreckage of ships and men. 
Only one ocean-going craft, the far-famed 
Argo, made it, sailing from Aieta; 
but she, too, would have crashed on the big rocks 
if Hera had not pulled her through, for love 
of Iéson, her captain. 
A second course 
lies between headlands. One is a sharp mountain 
piercing the sky, with stormcloud round the peak 
dissolving never, not in the brightest summer, 
to show heaven’s azure there, nor in the fall. 
No mortal man could scale it, nor so much 
as land there, not with twenty hands and feet, 
so sheer the cliffs are—as of polished stone. 
Midway that height, a cavern full of mist 
opens toward Erebos and evening. Skirting 
this in the lugger, great Odysseus, 
your master bowman, shooting from the deck, 
would come short of the cavemouth with his shaft; 
but that is the den of Skylla, where she yaps 
abominably, a newborn whelp’s cry, 
though she is huge and monstrous. God or man, 
no one could look on her in joy. Her legs— 
and there are twelve—are like great tentacles, 
unjointed, and upon her serpent necks 
are borne six heads like nightmares of ferocity, 
with triple serried rows of fangs and deep 
gullets of black death. Half her length, she sways 
her heads in air, outside her horrid cleft, 
hunting the sea around that promontory 
for dolphins, dogfish, or what bigger game 
thundering Amphitrite feeds in thousands. 
And no ship’s company can claim 
to have passed her without loss and grief; she takes, 
from every ship, one man for every gullet. 
The opposite point seems more a tongue of land 
you’d touch with a good bowshot, at the narrows. 
A great wild fig, a shaggy mass of leaves, 
grows on it, and Kharybdis lurks below 
to swallow down the dark sea tide. Three times 
from dawn to dusk she spews it up 
and sucks it down again three times, a whirling 
maelstrom; if you come upon her then 
the god who makes earth tremble could not save you. 
No, hug the cliff of Skylla, take your ship 
through on a racing stroke. Better to mourn 
six men than lose them all, and the ship, too.’ 
So her advice ran; but I faced her, saying: 
‘Only instruct me, goddess, if you will, 
how, if possible, can I pass Kharybdis, 
or fight off Skylla when she raids my crew?’ 
Swiftly that loveliest goddess answered me: 
‘Must you have battle in your heart forever? 
The bloody toil of combat? Old contender, 
will you not yield to the immortal gods? 
That nightmare cannot die, being eternal 
evil itself—horror, and pain, and chaos; 
there is no fighting her, no power can fight her, 
all that avails is flight. 
Lose headway there 
along that rockface while you break out arms, 
and she’ll swoop over you, I fear, once more, 
taking one man again for every gullet. 
No, no, put all your backs into it, row on; 
invoke Blind Force, that bore this scourge of men, 
to keep her from a second strike against you. 
Then you will coast Thrinakia, the island 
where Helios’ cattle graze, fine herds, and flocks 
of goodly sheep. The herds and flocks are seven, 
with fifty beasts in each. 
No lambs are dropped, 
or calves, and these fat cattle never die. 
Immortal, too, their cowherds are—their shepherds— 
Phaéthousa and Lampetia, sweetly braided 
nymphs that divine Neaira bore 
to the overlord of high noon, Helios. 
These nymphs their gentle mother bred and placed 
upon Thrinakia, the distant land, 
in care of flocks and cattle for their father. 
Now give those kine a wide berth, keep your thoughts 
intent upon your course for home, 
and hard seafaring brings you all to Ithaka. 
But if you raid the beeves, I see destruction 
for ship and crew. 
Rough years then lie between 
you and your homecoming, alone and old, 
the one survivor, all companions lost.’ 
As Kirke spoke, Dawn mounted her golden throne, 
and on the first rays Kirké left me, taking 
her way like a great goddess up the island. 
I made straight for the ship, roused up the men 
to get aboard and cast off at the stern. 
They scrambled to their places by the rowlocks 
and all in line dipped oars in the grey sea. 
But soon an off-shore breeze blew to our liking— 
a canvas-bellying breeze, a lusty shipmate 
sent by the singing nymph with sunbright hair. 
So we made fast the braces, and we rested, 
letting the wind and steersman work the ship. 
The crew being now silent before me, I 
addressed them, sore at heart: 
‘Dear friends, 
more than one man, or two, should know those things 
Kirké foresaw for us and shared with me, 
so let me tell her forecast: then we die 
with our eyes open, if we are going to die, 
or know what death we baffle if we can. Seirenes 
weaving a haunting song over the sea 
we are to shun, she said, and their green shore 
all sweet with clover; yet she urged that I 
alone should listen to their song. Therefore 
you are to tie me up, tight as a splint, 
erect along the mast, lashed to the mast, 
and if I shout and beg to be untied, 
take more turns of the rope to muffle me.’ 
I rather dwelt on this part of the forecast, 
while our good ship made time, bound outward down 
the wind for the strange island of Seirénés. 
Then all at once the wind fell, and a calm 
came over all the sea, as though some power 
lulled the swell. 
The crew were on their feet 
briskly, to furl the sail, and stow it; then, 
each in place, they poised the smooth oar blades 
and sent the white foam scudding by. I carved 
a massive cake of beeswax into bits 
and rolled them in my hands until they softened— 
no long task, for a burning heat came down 
from Hélios, lord of high noon. Going forward 
I carried wax along the line, and laid it 
thick on their ears. They tied me up, then, plumb 
amidships, back to the mast, lashed to the mast, 
and took themselves again to rowing. Soon, 
as we came smartly within hailing distance, 
the two Seirénés, noting our fast ship 
off their point, made ready, and they sang: 
This way, oh turn your bows, 
Akhaia’s glory, 
As all the world allows— 
Moor and be merry. 
Sweet coupled airs we sing. 
No lonely seafarer 
Holds clear of entering 
Our green mirror. 
Pleased by each purling note 
Like honey twining 
From her throat and my throat, 
Who lies a-pining? 
Sea rovers here take joy 
Voyaging onward, 
As from our song of Troy 
Greybeard and rower-boy 
Goeth more learnéd. 
All feats on that great field 
In the long warfare, 
Dark days the bright gods willed, 
Wounds you bore there, 
Argos’ old soldiery 
On Troy beach teeming, 
Charmed out of time we see. 
No life on earth can be 
Hid from our dreaming. 
The lovely voices in ardor appealing over the water 
made me crave to listen, and I tried to say 
‘Untie me!’ to the crew, jerking my brows; 
but they bent steady to the oars. Then Perimedes 
got to his feet, he and Eurylokhos, 
and passed more line about, to hold me still. 
So all rowed on, until the Seirenes 
dropped under the sea rim, and their singing 
dwindled away. 
My faithful company 
rested on their oars now, peeling off 
the wax that I had laid thick on their ears; 
then set me free. 
But scarcely had that island 
faded in blue air than I saw smoke 
and white water, with sound of waves in tumult— 
a sound the men heard, and it terrified them. 
Oars flew from their hands; the blades went knocking 
wild alongside till the ship lost way, 
with no oarblades to drive her through the water. 
Well, I walked up and down from bow to stern, 
trying to put heart into them, standing over 
every oarsman, saying gently, 
‘Friends, 
have we never been in danger before this? 
More fearsome, is it now, than when the Kyklops 
penned us in his cave? What power he had! 
Did I not keep my nerve, and use my wits 
to find a way out for us? 
Now I say 
by hook or crook this peril too shall be 
something that we remember. 
Heads up, lads! 
We must obey the orders as I give them. 
Get the oarshafts in your hands, and lay back 
hard on your benches; hit these breaking seas. 
Zeus help us pull away before we founder. 
You at the tiller, listen, and take in 
all that I say—the rudders are your duty; 
keep her out of the combers and the smoke; 
steer for that headland; watch the drift, or we 
fetch up in the smother, and you drown us.’ 
That was all, and it brought them round to action. 
But as I sent them on toward Skylla, I 
told them nothing, as they could do nothing. 
They would have dropped their oars again, in panic, 
to roll for cover under the decking. Kirke’s 
bidding against arms had slipped my mind, 
so I tied on my cuirass and took up 
two heavy spears, then made my way along 
to the foredeck—thinking to see her first from there, 
the monster of the grey rock, harboring 
torment for my friends. I strained my eyes 
upon that cliffside veiled in cloud, but nowhere 
could I catch sight of her. 
And all this time, 
in travail, sobbing, gaining on the current, 
we rowed into the strait—Skylla to port 
and on our starboard beam Kharybdis, dire 
gorge of the salt sea tide. By heaven! when she 
vomited, all the sea was like a cauldron 
seething over intense fire, when the mixture 
suddenly heaves and rises. 
The shot spume 
soared to the landside heights, and fell like rain. 
But when she swallowed the sea water down 
we saw the funnel of the maelstrom, heard 
the rock bellowing all around, and dark 
sand raged on the bottom far below. 
My men all blanched against the gloom, our eyes 
were fixed upon that yawning mouth in fear 
of being devoured. 
Then Skylla made her strike, 
whisking six of my best men from the ship. 
I happened to glance aft at ship and oarsmen 
and caught sight of their arms and legs, dangling 
high overhead. Voices came down to me 
in anguish, calling my name for the last time. 
A man surfcasting on a point of rock 
for bass or mackerel, whipping his long rod 
to drop the sinker and the bait far out, 
will hook a fish and rip it from the surface 
to dangle wriggling through the air: 
so these 
were borne aloft in spasms toward the cliff. 
She ate them as they shrieked there, in her den, 
in the dire grapple, reaching still for me— 
and deathly pity ran me through 
at that sight—far the worst I ever suffered, 
questing the passes of the strange sea. 
We rowed on. 
The Rocks were now behind; Kharybdis, too, 
and Skylla dropped astern. 
Then we were coasting 
the noble island of the god, where grazed 
those cattle with wide brows, and bounteous flocks 
of Helios, lord of noon, who rides high heaven. 
From the black ship, far still at sea, I heard 
the lowing of the cattle winding home 
and sheep bleating; and heard, too, in my heart 
the words of blind Teiresias of Thebes 
and Kirke of Aiaia: both forbade me 
the island of the world’s delight, the Sun. 
So I spoke out in gloom to my companions: 
‘Shipmates, grieving and weary though you are, 
listen: I had forewarning from Teirésias 
and Kirké, too; both told me I must shun 
this island of the Sun, the world’s delight. 
Nothing but fatal trouble shall we find here. 
Pull away, then, and put the land astern.’ 
That strained them to the breaking point, and, cursing, 
Eurylokhos cried out in bitterness: 
‘Are you flesh and blood, Odysseus, to endure 
more than a man can? Do you never tire? 
God, look at you, iron is what you’re made of. 
Here we all are, half dead with weariness, 
falling asleep over the oars, and you 
say “No landing”—no firm island earth 
where we could make a quiet supper. No: 
pull out to sea, you say, with night upon us— 
just as before, but wandering now, and lost. 
Sudden storms can rise at night and swamp 
ships without a trace. 
Where is your shelter 
if some stiff gale blows up from south or west— 
the winds that break up shipping every time 
when seamen flout the lord gods’ will? I say 
do as the hour demands and go ashore 
before black night comes down. 
We'll make our supper 
alongside, and at dawn put out to sea.’ 
Now when the rest said ‘Aye’ to this, I saw 
the power of destiny devising ill. 
Sharply I answered, without hesitation: 
‘Eurylokhos, they are with you to a man. 
I am alone, outmatched. 
Let this whole company 
swear me a great oath: Any herd of cattle 
or flock of sheep here found shall go unharmed; 
no one shall slaughter out of wantonness 
ram or heifer; all shall be content 
with what the goddess Kirké put aboard.’ 
They fell at once to swearing as I ordered, 
and when the round of oaths had ceased, we found 
a halfmoon bay to beach and moor the ship in, 
with a fresh spring nearby. All hands ashore 
went about skillfully getting up a meal. 
Then, after thirst and hunger, those besiegers, 
were turned away, they mourned for their companions 
plucked from the ship by Skylla and devoured, 
and sleep came soft upon them as they mourned. 
In the small hours of the third watch, when stars 
that shone out in the first dusk of evening 
had gone down to their setting, a giant wind 
blew from heaven, and clouds driven by Zeus 
shrouded land and sea in a night of storm; 
so, just as Dawn with finger tips of rose 
touched the windy world, we dragged our ship 
to cover in a grotto, a sea cave 
where nymphs had chairs of rock and sanded floors. 
I mustered all the crew and said: 
‘Old shipmates, 
our stores are in the ship’s hold, food and drink; 
the cattle here are not for our provision, 
or we pay dearly for it. 
Fierce the god is 
who cherishes these heifers and these sheep: 
Hélios; and no man avoids his eye.’ 
To this my fighters nodded. Yes. But now 
we had a month of onshore gales, blowing 
day in, day out—south winds, or south by east. 
As long as bread and good red wine remained 
to keep the men up, and appease their craving, 
they would not touch the cattle. But in the end, 
when all the barley in the ship was gone, 
hunger drove them to scour the wild shore 
with angling hooks, for fishes and sea fowl, 
whatever fell into their hands; and lean days 
wore their bellies thin. 
he storms continued. 
So one day I withdrew to the interior 
to pray the gods in solitude, for hope 
that one might show me some way of salvation. 
Slipping away, I struck across the island 
to a sheltered spot, out of the driving gale. 
I washed my hands there, and made supplication 
to the gods who own Olympos, all the gods— 
but they, for answer, only closed my eyes 
under slow drops of sleep. 
Now on the shore Eurylokhos 
made his insidious plea: 
‘Comrades,’ he said, 
‘You’ve gone through everything; listen to what I say. 
All deaths are hateful to us, mortal wretches, 
but famine is the most pitiful, the worst 
end that a man can come to. 
Will you fight it? 
Come, we’ll cut out the noblest of these cattle 
for sacrifice to the gods who own the sky; 
and once at home, in the old country of Ithaka, 
if ever that day comes— 
we'll build a costly temple and adorn it 
with every beauty for the Lord of Noon. 
But if he flares up over his heifers lost, 
wishing our ship destroyed, and if the gods 
make cause with him, why, then I say: Better 
open your lungs to a big sea once for all 
than waste to skin and bones on a lonely island!’ 
Thus Eurylokhos; and they murmured ‘Aye!’ 
trooping away at once to round up heifers. 
Now, that day tranquil cattle with broad brows 
were grazing near, and soon the men drew up 
around their chosen beasts in ceremony. 
They plucked the leaves that shone on a tall oak— 
having no barley meal—to strew the victims, 
performed the prayers and ritual, knifed the kine 
and flayed each carcass, cutting thighbones free 
to wrap in double folds of fat. These offerings, 
with strips of meat, were laid upon the fire. 
Then, as they had no wine, they made libation 
with clear spring water, broiling the entrails first; 
and when the bones were burnt and tripes shared, 
they spitted the carved meat. 
Just then my slumber 
left me in a rush, my eyes opened, 
and I went down the seaward path. No sooner 
had I caught sight of our black hull, than savory 
odors of burnt fat eddied around me; 
grief took hold of me, and I cried aloud: 
‘O Father Zeus and gods in bliss forever, 
you made me sleep away this day of mischief! 
O cruel drowsing, in the evil hour! 
Here they sat, and a great work they contrived.’ 
Lampetia in her long gown meanwhile 
had borne swift word to the Overlord of Noon: 
‘They have killed your kine.’ 
And the Lord Hélios 
burst into angry speech amid the immortals: 
‘O Father Zeus and gods in bliss forever, 
punish Odysseus’ men! So overweening, 
now they have killed my peaceful kine, my joy 
at morning when I climbed the sky of stars, 
and evening, when I bore westward from heaven. 
Restitution or penalty they shall pay— 
and pay in full—or I go down forever 
to light the dead men in the underworld.’ 
Then Zeus who drives the stormcloud made reply: 
‘Peace, Helios: shine on among the gods, 
shine over mortals in the fields of grain. 
Let me throw down one white-hot bolt, and make 
splinters of their ship in the winedark sea.’ 
—Kalypso later told me of this exchange, 
as she declared that Hermes had told her. 
Well, when I reached the sea cave and the ship, 
I faced each man, and had it out; but where 
could any remedy be found? There was none. 
The silken beeves of Helios were dead. 
The gods, moreover, made queer signs appear: 
cowhides began to crawl, and beef, both raw 
and roasted, lowed like kine upon the spits. 
Now six full days my gallant crew could feast 
upon the prime beef they had marked for slaughter 
from Helios’ herd; and Zeus, the son of Kronos, 
added one fine morning. 
All the gales 
had ceased, blown out, and with an offshore breeze 
we launched again, stepping the mast and sail, 
to make for the open sea. Astern of us 
the island coastline faded, and no land 
showed anywhere, but only sea and heaven, 
when Zeus Kronion piled a thunderhead 
above the ship, while gloom spread on the ocean. 
We held our course, but briefly. Then the squall 
struck whining from the west, with gale force, breaking 
both forestays, and the mast came toppling aft 
along the ship’s length, so the running rigging 
showered into the bilge. 
On the after deck 
the mast had hit the steersman a slant blow 
bashing the skull in, knocking him overside, 
as the brave soul fled the body, like a diver. 
With crack on crack of thunder, Zeus let fly 
a bolt against the ship, a direct hit, 
so that she bucked, in reeking fumes of sulphur, 
and all the men were flung into the sea. 
They came up ’round the wreck, bobbing a while 
like petrels on the waves. 
No more seafaring 
homeward for these, no sweet day of return; 
the god had turned his face from them. 
I clambered 
fore and aft my hulk until a comber 
split her, keel from ribs, and the big timber 
floated free; the mast, too, broke away. 
A backstay floated dangling from it, stout 
rawhide rope, and I used this for lashing 
mast and keel together. These I straddled, 
riding the frightful storm. 
Nor had I yet 
seen the worst of it: for now the west wind 
dropped, and a southeast gale came on—one more 
twist of the knife—taking me north again, 
straight for Kharybdis. All that night I drifted, 
and in the sunrise, sure enough, I lay 
off Skylla mountain and Kharybdis deep. 
There, as the whirlpool drank the tide, a billow 
tossed me, and I sprang for the great fig tree, 
catching on like a bat under a bough. 
Nowhere had I to stand, no way of climbing, 
the root and bole being far below, and far 
above my head the branches and their leaves, 
massed, overshadowing Kharybdis pool. 
But I clung grimly, thinking my mast and keel 
would come back to the surface when she spouted. 
And ah! how long, with what desire, I waited! 
till, at the twilight hour, when one who hears 
and judges pleas in the marketplace all day 
between contentious men, goes home to supper, 
the long poles at last reared from the sea. 
Now I let go with hands and feet, plunging 
straight into the foam beside the timbers, 
pulled astride, and rowed hard with my hands 
to pass by Skylla. Never could I have passed her 
had not the Father of gods and men, this time, 
kept me from her eyes. Once through the strait, 
nine days I drifted in the open sea 
before I made shore, buoyed up by the gods, 
upon Ogygia Isle. The dangerous nymph 
Kalypso lives and sings there, in her beauty, 
and she received me, loved me. 
But why tell 
the same tale that I told last night in hall 
to you and to your lady? Those adventures 
made a long evening, and I do not hold 
with tiresome repetition of a story.” 


BOOK 13

He ended it, and no one stirred or sighed 
in the shadowy hall, spellbound as they all were, 
until Alkinods answered: 
“When you came 
here to my strong home, Odysseus, under 
my tall roof, headwinds were left behind you. 
Clear sailing shall you have now, homeward now, 
however painful all the past. 
My lords, 
ever my company, sharing the wine of Council, 
the songs of the blind harper, hear me further: 
garments are folded for our guest and friend 
in the smooth chest, and gold 
in various shaping of adornment lies 
with other gifts, and many, brought by our peers; 
let each man add his tripod and deep-bellied 
cauldron: we'll make levy upon the realm 
to pay us for the loss each bears in this.” 
Alkinoés had voiced their own hearts’ wish. 
All gave assent, then home they went to rest; 
but young Dawn’s finger tips of rose, touching 
the world, roused them to make haste to the ship, 
each with his gift of noble bronze. AlkinoGs, 
their ardent king, stepping aboard himself, 
directed the stowing under the cross planks, 
not to cramp the long pull of the oarsmen. 
Going then to the great hall, lords and crew 
prepared for feasting. 
As the gods’ anointed, 
Alkinoés made offering on their behalf—an ox 
to Zeus beyond the stormcloud, Kronos’ son, 
who rules the world. They burnt the great thighbones 
and feasted at their ease on fresh roast meat, 
as in their midst the godlike harper sang— 
Deméddokos, honored by all that realm. 
Only Odysseus 
time and again turned craning toward the sun, 
impatient for day’s end, for the open sea. 
Just as a farmer’s hunger grows, behind 
the bolted plow and share, all day afield, 
drawn by his team of winedark oxen: sundown 
is benison for him, sending him homeward 
stiff in the knees from weariness, to dine; 
just so, the light on the sea rim gladdened Odysseus, 
and as it dipped he stood among the Phaiakians, 
turned to AlkinoGs, and said: 
“O king and admiration of your people, 
give me fare well, and stain the ground with wine; 
my blessings on you all! This hour brings 
fulfillment to the longing of my heart: 
a ship for home, and gifts the gods of heaven 
make so precious and so bountiful. 
After this voyage 
god grant I find my own wife in my hall 
with everyone I love best, safe and sound! 
And may you, settled in your land, give joy 
to wives and children; may the gods reward you 
every way, and your realm be free of woe.” 
Then all the voices rang out, “Be it so!” 
and “Well spoken!” and “Let our friend make sail!” 
Whereon Alkínoös gave command to his crier: 
“Fill the winebowl, Pontónoös: mix and serve: 
go the whole round, so may this company 
invoke our Father Zeus, and bless our friend, 
seaborne tonight and bound for his own country.” 
Pontónoös mixed the honey-hearted wine 
and went from chair to chair, filling the cups; 
then each man where he sat poured out his offering 
to the gods in bliss who own the sweep of heaven. 
With gentle bearing Odysseus rose, and placed 
his double goblet in Arete’s hands, 
saying: 
“Great Queen, farewell; 
be blest through all your days till age comes on you, 
and death, last end for mortals, after age. 
Now I must go my way. Live in felicity, 
and make this palace lovely for your children, 
your countrymen, and your king, Alkinoés.” 
Royal Odysseus turned and crossed the door sill, 
a herald at his right hand, sent by Alkinods 
to lead him to the sea beach and the ship. 
Arete, too, sent maids in waiting after him, 
one with a laundered great cloak and a tunic, 
a second balancing the crammed sea chest, 
a third one bearing loaves and good red wine. 
As soon as they arrived alongside, crewmen 
took these things for stowage under the planks, 
their victualling and drink; then spread a rug 
and linen cover on the after deck, 
where Lord Odysseus might sleep in peace. 
Now he himself embarked, lay down, lay still, 
while oarsmen took their places at the rowlocks 
all in order. They untied their hawser, 
passing it through a drilled stone ring; then bent 
forward at the oars and caught the sea 
as one man, stroking. 
Slumber, soft and deep 
like the still sleep of death, weighed on his eyes 
as the ship hove seaward. 
How a four horse team 
whipped into a run on a straightaway 
consumes the road, surging and surging over it! 
So ran that craft and showed her heels to the swell, 
her bow wave riding after, and her wake 
on the purple night-sea foaming. 
Hour by hour 
she held her pace; not even a falcon wheeling 
downwind, swiftest bird, could stay abreast of her 
in that most arrowy flight through open water, 
with her great passenger—godlike in counsel, 
he that in twenty years had borne such blows 
in his deep heart, breaking through ranks in war 
and waves on the bitter sea. 
This night at last 
he slept serene, his long-tried mind at rest. 
When on the East the sheer bright star arose 
that tells of coming Dawn, the ship made landfall 
and came up islandward in the dim of night. 
Phorkys, the old sea baron, has a cove 
here in the realm of Ithaka; two points 
of high rock, breaking sharply, hunch around it, 
making a haven from the plunging surf 
that gales at sea roll shoreward. Deep inside, 
at mooring range, good ships can ride unmoored. 
There, on the inmost shore, an olive tree 
throws wide its boughs over the bay; nearby 
a cave of dusky light is hidden 
for those immortal girls, the Naiades. 
Within are winebowls hollowed in the rock 
and amphorai; bees bring their honey here; 
and there are looms of stone, great looms, whereon 
the weaving nymphs make tissues, richly dyed 
as the deep sea is; and clear springs in the cavern 
flow forever. Of two entrances, 
one on the north allows descent of mortals, 
but beings out of light alone, the undying, 
can pass by the south slit; no men come there. 
This cove the sailors knew. Here they drew in, 
and the ship ran half her keel’s length up the shore, 
she had such way on her from those great oarsmen. 
Then from their benches forward on dry ground 
they disembarked. They hoisted up Odysseus 
unruffled on his bed, under his cover, 
handing him overside still fast asleep, 
to lay him on the sand; and they unloaded 
all those gifts the princes of Phaiakia 
gave him, when by Athena’s heart and will 
he won his passage home. They bore this treasure 
off the beach, and piled it close around 
the roots of the olive tree, that no one passing 
should steal Odysseus’ gear before he woke. 
That done, they pulled away on the homeward track. 
But now the god that shakes the islands, brooding 
over old threats of his against Odysseus, 
approached Lord Zeus to learn his will. Said he: 
“Father of gods, will the bright immortals ever 
pay me respect again, if mortals do not?— 
Phaiakians, too, my own blood kin? 
I thought 
Odysseus should in time regain his homeland; 
I had no mind to rob him of that day— 
no, no; you promised it, being so inclined; 
only I thought he should be made to suffer 
all the way. 
But now these islanders 
have shipped him homeward, sleeping soft, and put him 
on Ithaka, with gifts untold 
of bronze and gold, and fine cloth to his shoulder. 
Never from Troy had he borne off such booty 
if he had got home safe with all his share.” 
Then Zeus who drives the stormcloud answered, sighing: 
“God of horizons, making earth’s underbeam 
tremble, why do you grumble so? 
The immortal gods show you no less esteem, 
and the rough consequence would make them slow 
to let barbs fly at their eldest and most noble. 
But if some mortal captain, overcome 
by his own pride of strength, cuts or defies you, 
are you not always free to take reprisal? 
Act as your wrath requires and as you will.” 
Now said Poseidon, god of earthquake: 
“Aye, 
god of the stormy sky, I should have taken 
vengeance, as you say, and on my own; 
but I respect, and would avoid, your anger. 
The sleek Phaidkian cutter, even now, 
has carried out her mission and glides home 
over the misty sea. Let me impale her, 
end her voyage, and end all ocean-crossing 
with passengers, then heave a mass of mountain 
in a ring around the city.” 
Now Zeus who drives the stormcloud said benignly: 
“Here is how I should do it, little brother: 
when all who watch upon the wall have caught 
sight of the ship, let her be turned to stone— 
an island like a ship, just off the bay. 
Mortals may gape at that for generations! 
But throw no mountain round the sea port city.” 
When he heard this, Poseidon, god of earthquake, 
departed for Skheria, where the Phaiakians 
are born and dwell. Their ocean-going ship 
he saw already near, heading for harbor; 
so up behind her swam the island-shaker 
and struck her into stone, rooted in stone, at one 
blow of his palm, 
then took to the open sea. 
Those famous ship handlers, the Phaidkians, 
gazed at each other, murmuring in wonder; 
you could have heard one say: 
“Now who in thunder 
has anchored, moored that ship in the seaway, 
when everyone could see her making harbor?” 
The god had wrought a charm beyond their thought. 
But soon Alkinods made them hush, and told them: 
“This present doom upon the ship—on me— 
my father prophesied in the olden time. 
If we gave safe conveyance to all passengers 
we should incur Poseidon’s wrath, he said, 
whereby one day a fair ship, manned by Phaiakians, 
would come to grief at the god’s hands; and great 
mountains would hide our city from the sea. 
So my old father forecast. 
Use your eyes: 
these things are even now being brought to pass. 
Let all here abide by my decree: 
We make 
an end henceforth of taking, in our ships, 
castaways who may land upon Skheria; 
and twelve choice bulls we dedicate at once 
to Lord Poseidon, praying him of his mercy 
not to heave up a mountain round our city.” 
In fearful awe they led the bulls to sacrifice 
and stood about the altar stone, those captains, 
peers of Phaiákia, led by their king in prayer 
to Lord Poseidon. 
Meanwhile, on his island, 
his father’s shore, that kingly man, Odysseus, 
awoke, but could not tell what land it was 
after so many years away; moreover, 
Pallas Athena, Zeus’s daughter, poured 
a grey mist all around him, hiding him 
from common sight—for she had things to tell him 
and wished no one to know him, wife or townsmen, 
before the suitors paid up for their crimes. 
The landscape then looked strange, unearthly strange 
to the Lord Odysseus: paths by hill and shore, 
glimpses of harbors, cliffs, and summer trees. 
He stood up, rubbed his eyes, gazed at his homeland, 
and swore, slapping his thighs with both his palms, 
then cried aloud: 
“What am I in for now? 
Whose country have I come to this time? Rough 
savages and outlaws, are they, or 
godfearing people, friendly to castaways? 
Where shall I take these things? Where take myself, 
with no guide, no directions? These should be 
still in Phaidkian hands, and I uncumbered, 
free to find some other openhearted 
prince who might be kind and give me passage. 
I have no notion where to store this treasure; 
first-comer’s trove it is, if I leave it here. 
My lords and captains of Phaiakia 
were not those decent men they seemed, not honorable, 
landing me in this unknown country—no, 
by god, they swore to take me home to Ithaka 
and did not! Zeus attend to their reward, 
Zeus, patron of petitioners, who holds 
all other mortals under his eye; he takes 
payment from betrayers! 
I'll be busy. 
I can look through my gear. I shouldn’t wonder 
if they pulled out with part of it on board.” 
He made a tally of his shining pile— 
tripods, cauldrons, cloaks, and gold—and found 
he lacked nothing at all. 
And then he wept, 
despairing, for his own land, trudging down 
beside the endless wash of the wide, wide sea, 
weary and desolate as the sea. But soon 
Athena came to him from the nearby air, 
putting a young man’s figure on—a shepherd, 
like a king’s son, all delicately made. 
She wore a cloak, in two folds off her shoulders, 
and sandals bound upon her shining feet. 
A hunting lance lay in her hands. 
At sight of her 
Odysseus took heart, and he went forward 
to greet the lad, speaking out fair and clear: 
“Friend, you are the first man I’ve laid eyes on 
here in this cove. Greetings. Do not feel 
alarmed or hostile, coming across me; only 
receive me into safety with my stores. 
Touching your knees I ask it, as I might 
ask grace of a god. 
O sir, advise me, 
what is this land and realm, who are the people? 
Is it an island all distinct, or part 
of the fertile mainland, sloping to the sea?” 
To this grey-eyed Athena answered: 
“Stranger, 
you must come from the other end of nowhere, 
else you are a great booby, having to ask 
what place this is. It is no nameless country. 
Why, everyone has heard of it, the nations 
over on the dawn side, toward the sun, 
and westerners in cloudy lands of evening. 
No one would use this ground for training horses, 
it is too broken, has no breadth of meadow; 
but there is nothing meager about the soil, 
the yield of grain is wondrous, and wine, too, 
with drenching rains and dewfall. 
There’s good pasture 
for oxen and for goats, all kinds of timber, 
and water all year long in the cattle ponds. 
For these blessings, friend, the name of Ithaka 
has made its way even as far as Troy— 
and they say Troy lies far beyond Akhaia.” 
Now Lord Odysseus, the long-enduring, 
laughed in his heart, hearing his land described 
by Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus who rules 
the veering stormwind; and he answered her 
with ready speech—not that he told the truth, 
but, just as she did, held back what he knew, 
weighing within himself at every step 
what he made up to serve his turn. 
Said he: 
“Far away in Krete I learned of Ithaka— 
in that broad island over the great ocean. 
And here I am now, come myself to Ithaka! 
Here is my fortune with me. I left my sons 
an equal part, when I shipped out. I killed 
Orsilokhos, the courier, son of Idmeneus. 
This man could beat the best cross country runners 
in Krete, but he desired to take away 
my Trojan plunder, all I had fought and bled for, 
cutting through ranks in war and the cruel sea. 
Confiscation is what he planned; he knew 
I had not cared to win his father’s favor 
as a staff officer in the field at Troy, 
but led my own command. 
I acted: I 
hit him with a spearcast from a roadside 
as he came down from the open country. Murky 
night shrouded all heaven and the stars. 
I made that ambush with one man at arms. 
We were unseen. I took his life in secret, 
finished him off with my sharp sword. That night 
I found asylum on a ship off shore 
skippered by gentlemen of Phoinikia; I gave 
all they could wish, out of my store of plunder, 
for passage, and for landing me at Pylos 
or Elis Town, where the Epeioi are in power. 
Contrary winds carried them willy-nilly 
past that coast; they had no wish to cheat me, 
but we were blown off course. 
Here, then, by night 
we came, and made this haven by hard rowing. 
All famished, but too tired to think of food, 
each man dropped in his tracks after the landing, 
and I slept hard, being wearied out. Before 
I woke today, they put my things ashore 
on the sand here beside me where I lay, 
then reimbarked for Sidon, that great city. 
Now they are far at sea, while I am left 
forsaken here.” 
At this the grey-eyed goddess 
Athena smiled, and gave him a caress, 
her looks being changed now, so she seemed a woman, 
tall and beautiful and no doubt skilled 
at weaving splendid things. She answered briskly: 
“Whoever gets around you must be sharp 
and guileful as a snake; even a god 
might bow to you in ways of dissimulation. 
You! You chameleon! 
Bottomless bag of tricks! Here in your own country 
would you not give your stratagems a rest 
or stop spellbinding for an instant? 
You play a part as if it were your own tough skin. 
No more of this, though. Two of a kind, we are, 
contrivers, both. Of all men now alive 
you are the best in plots and story telling. 
My own fame is for wisdom among the gods— 
deceptions, too. 
Would even you have guessed 
that I am Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus, 
I that am always with you in times of trial, 
a shield to you in battle, I who made 
the Phaiadkians befriend you, to a man? 
Now I am here again to counsel with you— 
but first to put away those gifts the Phaidkians 
gave you at departure-I planned it so. 
Then I can tell you of the gall and wormwood 
it is your lot to drink in your own hall. 
Patience, iron patience, you must show; 
so give it out to neither man nor woman 
that you are back from wandering. Be silent 
under all injuries, even blows from men.” 
His mind ranging far, Odysseus answered: 
“Can mortal man be sure of you on sight, 
even a sage, O mistress of disguises? 
Once you were fond of me—I am sure of that— 
years ago, when we Akhaians made 
war, in our generation, upon Troy. 
But after we had sacked the shrines of Priam 
and put to sea, God scattered the Akhaians; 
I never saw you after that, never 
knew you aboard with me, to act as shield 
in grievous times—not till you gave me comfort 
in the rich hinterland of the Phaidkians 
and were yourself my guide into that city. 
Hear me now in your father’s name, for I 
cannot believe that I have come to Ithaka. 
It is some other land. You made that speech 
only to mock me, and to take me in. 
Have I come back in truth to my home island?” 
To this the grey-eyed goddess Athena answered: 
“Always the same detachment! That is why 
I cannot fail you, in your evil fortune, 
coolheaded, quick, well-spoken as you are! 
Would not another wandering man, in joy, 
make haste home to his wife and children? Not 
you, not yet. Before you hear their story 
you will have proof about your wife. 
I tell you, 
she still sits where you left her, and her days 
and nights go by forlorn, in lonely weeping. 
For my part, never had I despaired; I felt 
sure of your coming home, though all your men 
should perish; but I never cared to fight 
Poseidon, Father’s brother, in his baleful 
rage with you for taking his son’s eye. 
Now I shall make you see the shape of Ithaka. 
Here is the cove the sea lord Phorkys owns, 
there is the olive spreading out her leaves 
over the inner bay, and there the cavern 
dusky and lovely, hallowed by the feet 
of those immortal girls, the Naiadés— 
the same wide cave under whose vault you came 
to honor them with hekatombs—and there 
Mount Neion, with his forest on his back!” 
She had dispelled the mist, so all the island 
stood out clearly. Then indeed Odysseus’ 
heart stirred with joy. He kissed the earth, 
and lifting up his hands prayed to the nymphs: 
“O slim shy Naiades, young maids of Zeus, 
I had not thought to see you ever again! 
O listen smiling 
to my gentle prayers, and we’ll make offering 
plentiful as in the old time, granted I 
live, granted my son grows tall, by favor 
of great Athena, Zeus’s daughter, 
who gives the winning fighter his reward!” 
The grey-eyed goddess said directly: 
“Courage; 
and let the future trouble you no more. 
We go to make a cache now, in the cave, 
to keep your treasure hid. Then we’ll consider 
how best the present action may unfold.” 
The goddess turned and entered the dim cave, 
exploring it for crannies, while Odysseus 
carried up all the gold, the fire-hard bronze, 
and well-made clothing the Phaiadkians gave him. 
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus the storm king, 
placed them, and shut the cave mouth with a stone, 
and under the old grey olive tree those two 
sat down to work the suitors death and woe. 
Grey-eyed Athena was the first to speak, saying: 
“Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
put your mind on a way to reach and strike 
a crowd of brazen upstarts. 
Three long years 
they have played master in your house: three years 
trying to win your lovely lady, making 
gifts as though betrothed. And she? Forever 
grieving for you, missing your return, 
she has allowed them all to hope, and sent 
messengers with promises to each— 
though her true thoughts are fixed elsewhere.” 
At this 
the man of ranging mind, Odysseus, cried: 
“So hard beset! An end like Agamémnon’s 
might very likely have been mine, a bad end, 
bleeding to death in my own hall. You forestalled it, 
goddess, by telling me how the land lies. 
Weave me a way to pay them back! And you, too, 
take your place with me, breathe valor in me 
the way you did that night when we Akhaians 
unbound the bright veil from the brow of Troy! 
O grey-eyed one, fire my heart and brace me! 
Pll take on fighting men three hundred strong 
if you fight at my back, immortal lady!” 
The grey-eyed goddess Athena answered him: 
“No fear but I shall be there; you’ll go forward 
under my arm when the crux comes at last. 
And I foresee your vast floor stained with blood, 
spattered with brains of this or that tall suitor 
who fed upon your cattle. 
Now, for a while, 
I shall transform you; not a soul will know you, 
the clear skin of your arms and legs shriveled, 
your chestnut hair all gone, your body dressed 
in sacking that a man would gag to see, 
and the two eyes, that were so brilliant, dirtied— 
contemptible, you shall seem to your enemies, 
as to the wife and son you left behind. 
But join the swineherd first—the overseer 
of all your swine, a good soul now as ever, 
devoted to Penelope and your son. 
He will be found near Raven’s Rock and the well 
of Arethousa, where the swine are pastured, 
rooting for acorns to their hearts’ content, 
drinking the dark still water. Boarflesh grows 
pink and fat on that fresh diet. There 
stay with him and question him, while I 
am off to the great beauty’s land of Sparta, 
to call your son Telémakhos home again— 
for you should know, he went to the wide land 
of Lakedaimon, Menelaos’ country, 
to learn if there were news of you abroad.” 
Odysseus answered: 
“Why not tell him, knowing 
my whole history, as you do? Must he 
traverse the barren sea, he too, and live 
in pain, while others feed on what is his?” 
At this the grey-eyed goddess Athena said: 
“No need for anguish on that lad’s account. 
I sent him off myself, to make his name 
in foreign parts—no hardship in the bargain, 
taking his ease in Meneláos’ mansion, 
lapped in gold. 
The young bucks here, I know, 
lie in wait for him in a cutter, bent 
on murdering him before he reaches home. 
I rather doubt they will. Cold earth instead 
will take in her embrace a man or two 
of those who fed so long on what is his.” 
Speaking no more, she touched him with her wand, 
shriveled the clear skin of his arms and legs, 
made all his hair fall out, cast over him 
the wrinkled hide of an old man, and bleared 
both his eyes, that were so bright. Then she 
clapped an old tunic, a foul cloak, upon him, 
tattered, filthy, stained by greasy smoke, 
and over that a mangy big buck skin. 
A staff she gave him, and a leaky knapsack 
with no strap but a loop of string. 
Now then, 
their colloquy at an end, they went their ways— 
Athena toward illustrious Lakedaimon 
far over sea, to join Odysseus’ son. 


BOOK 14

He went up from the cove through wooded ground, 
taking a stony trail into the high hills, where 
the swineherd lived, according to Athena. 
Of all Odysseus’ field hands in the old days 
this forester cared most for the estate; 
and now Odysseus found him 
in a remote clearing, sitting inside the gate 
of a stockade he built to keep the swine 
while his great lord was gone. 
Working alone, 
far from Penelope and old Laértés, 
he had put up a fieldstone hut and timbered it 
with wild pear wood. Dark hearts of oak he split 
and trimmed for a high palisade around it, 
and built twelve sties adjoining in this yard 
to hold the livestock. Fifty sows with farrows 
were penned in each, bedded upon the earth, 
while the boars lay outside—fewer by far, 
as those well-fatted were for the suitors’ table, 
fine pork, sent by the swineherd every day. 
Three hundred sixty now lay there at night, 
guarded by dogs—four dogs like wolves, one each 
for the four lads the swineherd reared and kept 
as under-herdsmen. 
When Odysseus came, 
the good servant sat shaping to his feet 
oxhide for sandals, cutting the well-cured leather. 
Three of his young men were afield, pasturing 
herds in other woods; one he had sent 
with a fat boar for tribute into town, 
the boy to serve while the suitors got their fill. 
The watch dogs, when they caught sight of Odysseus, 
faced him, a snarling troop, and pelted out 
viciously after him. Like a tricky beggar 
he sat down plump, and dropped his stick. No use. 
They would have rolled him in the dust and torn him 
there by his own steading if the swineherd 
had not sprung up and flung his leather down, 
making a beeline for the open. Shouting, 
throwing stone after stone, 
he made them scatter; then turned to his lord 
and said: 
“You might have got a ripping, man! 
Two shakes more and a pretty mess for me 
you could have called it, if you had the breath. 
As though I had not trouble enough already, 
given me by the gods, my master gone, 
true king that he was. I hang on here, 
still mourning for him, raising pigs of his 
to feed foreigners, and who knows where the man is, 
in some far country among strangers! Aye— 
if he is living still, if he still sees the light of day. 
Come to the cabin. You’re a wanderer too. 
You must eat something, drink some wine, and tell me 
where you are from and the hard times you’ve seen.” 
The forester now led him to his hut 
and made a couch for him, with tips of fir 
piled for a mattress under a wild goat skin, 
shaggy and thick, his own bed covering. 
Odysseus, 
in pleasure at this courtesy, gently said: 
“May Zeus and all the gods give you your heart’s desire 
for taking me in so kindly, friend.” 
Eumaios— 
O my swineherd!—answered him: 
“Tush, friend, 
rudeness to a stranger is not decency, 
poor though he may be, poorer than you. 
All wanderers 
and beggars come from Zeus. What we can give 
is slight but well-meant—all we dare. You know 
that is the way of slaves, who live in dread 
of masters—new ones like our own. 
I told you 
the gods, long ago, hindered our lord’s return. 
He had a fondness for me, would have pensioned me 
with acres of my own, a house, a wife 
that other men admired and courted; all 
gifts good-hearted kings bestow for service, 
for a life work the bounty of god has prospered— 
for it does prosper here, this work I do. 
Had he grown old in his own house, my master 
would have rewarded me. But the man’s gone. 
God curse the race of Helen and cut it down, 
that wrung the strength out of the knees of many! 
And he went, too—for the honor of Agamemnon 
he took ship overseas for the wild horse country 
of Troy, to fight the Trojans.” 
This being told, 
he tucked his long shirt up inside his belt 
and strode into the pens for two young porkers. 
He slaughtered them and singed them at the fire, 
flayed and quartered them, and skewered the meat 
to broil it all; then gave it to Odysseus 
hot on the spits. He shook out barley meal, 
took a winebowl of ivy wood and filled it, 
and sat down facing him, with a gesture, saying: 
“There is your dinner, friend, the pork of slaves. 
Our fat shoats are all eaten by the suitors, 
cold-hearted men, who never spare a thought 
for how they stand in the sight of Zeus. The gods 
living in bliss are fond of no wrongdoing, 
but honor discipline and right behavior. 
Even the outcasts of the earth, who bring 
piracy from the sea, and bear off plunder 
given by Zeus in shiploads—even those men 
deep in their hearts tremble for heaven’s eye. 
But the suitors, now, have heard some word, some oracle 
of my lord’s death, being so unconcerned 
to pay court properly or to go about their business. 
All they want is to prey on his estate, 
proud dogs: they stop at nothing. Not a day 
goes by, and not a night comes under Zeus, 
but they make butchery of our beeves and swine— 
not one or two beasts at a time, either. 
As for swilling down wine, they drink us dry. 
Only a great domain like his could stand it— 
greater than any on the dusky mainland 
or here in Ithaka. Not twenty heroes 
in the whole world were as rich as he. I know: 
I could count it all up: twelve herds in Elis, 
as many flocks, as many herds of swine, 
and twelve wide ranging herds of goats, as well, 
attended by his own men or by others— 
out at the end of the island, eleven herds 
are scattered now, with good men looking after them, 
and every herdsman, every day, picks out 
a prize ram to hand over to those fellows. 
I too as overseer, keeper of swine, 
must go through all my boars and send the best.” 
While he ran on, Odysseus with zeal 
applied himself to the meat and wine, but inwardly 
his thought shaped woe and ruin for the suitors. 
When he had eaten all that he desired 
and the cup he drank from had been filled again 
with wine—a welcome sight—, 
he spoke, and the words came light upon the air: 
“Who is this lord who once acquired you, 
so rich, so powerful, as you describe him? 
You think he died for Agamemnon’s honor. 
Tell me his name: I may have met someone 
of that description in my time. Who knows? 
Perhaps only the immortal gods could say 
if I should claim to have seen him: I have roamed 
about the world so long.” 
The swineherd answered 
as one who held a place of trust: 
“Well, man, 
his lady and his son will put no stock 
in any news of him brought by a rover. 
Wandering men tell lies for a night’s lodging, 
for fresh clothing; truth doesn’t interest them. 
Every time some traveller comes ashore 
he has to tell my mistress his pretty tale, 
and she receives him kindly, questions him, 
remembering her prince, while the tears run 
down her cheeks—and that is as it should be 
when a woman’s husband has been lost abroad. 
I suppose you, too, can work your story up 
at a moment’s notice, given a shirt or cloak. 
No: long ago wild dogs and carrion 
birds, most like, laid bare his ribs on land 
where life had left him. Or it may be, quick fishes 
picked him clean in the deep sea, and his bones 
lie mounded over in sand upon some shore. 
One way or another, far from home he died, 
a bitter loss, and pain, for everyone, 
certainly for me. Never again shall I 
have for my lot a master mild as he was 
anywhere—not even with my parents 
at home, where I was born and bred. I miss them 
less than I do him—though a longing comes 
to set my eyes on them in the old country. 
No, it is the lost man I ache to think of— 
Odysseus. And I speak the name respectfully, 
even if he is not here. He loved me, cared for me. 
I call him dear my lord, far though he be.” 
Now royal Odysseus, who had borne the long war, 
spoke again: 
“Friend, as you are so dead sure 
he will not come—and so mistrustful, too— 
let me not merely talk, as others talk, 
but swear to it: your lord is now at hand. 
And I expect a gift for this good news 
when he enters his own hall. Till then I would not 
take a rag, no matter what my need. 
I hate as I hate Hell’s own gate that weakness 
that makes a poor man into a flatterer. 
Zeus be my witness, and the table garnished 
for true friends, and Odysseus’ own hearth— 
by heaven, all I say will come to pass! 
He will return, and he will be avenged 
on any who dishonor his wife and son.” 
Eumaios—O my swineherd!—answered him: 
“I take you at your word, then: you shall have 
no good news gift from me. Nor will Odysseus 
enter his hall. But peace! drink up your wine. 
Let us talk now of other things. No more 
imaginings. It makes me heavy-hearted 
when someone brings my master back to mind— 
my own true master. 
No, by heaven, 
let us have no oaths! But if Odysseus 
can come again god send he may! My wish 
is that of Penelope and old Laértés 
and Prince Telémakhos, 
Ah, he’s another 
to be distressed about—Odysseus’ child, 
Telémakhos! By the gods’ grace he grew 
like a tough sapling, and I thought he’d be 
no less a man than his great father—strong 
and admirably made; but then someone, 
god or man, upset him, made him rash, 
so that he sailed away to sandy Pylos 
to hear news of his father. Now the suitors 
lie in ambush on his homeward track, 
ready to cut away the last shoot of Arkesios’ 
line, the royal stock of Ithaka. 
No good 
dwelling on it. Either he’ll be caught 
or else Kronion’s hand will take him through. 
Tell me, now, of your own trials and troubles. 
And tell me truly first, for I should know, 
who are you, where do you hail from, where’s your home 
and family? What kind of ship was yours, 
and what course brought you here? Who are your sailors? 
I don’t suppose you walked here on the sea.” 
To this the master of improvisation answered: 
“Pll tell you all that, clearly as I may. 
If we could sit here long enough, with meat 
and good sweet wine, warm here, in peace and quiet 
within doors, while the work of the world goes on— 
I might take all this year to tell my story 
and never end the tale of misadventures 
that wore my heart out, by the gods’ will. 
My native land is the wide seaboard of Krete 
where I grew up. I had a wealthy father, 
and many other sons were born to him 
of his true lady. My mother was a slave, 
his concubine; but Kastor Hylakidés, 
my father, treated me as a true born son. 
High honor came to him in that part of Krete 
for wealth and ease, and sons born for renown, 
before the death-bearing Keres drew him down 
to the underworld. His avid sons thereafter 
dividing up the property by lot 
gave me a wretched portion, a poor house. 
But my ability won me a wife 
of rich family. Fool I was never called, 
nor turn-tail in a fight. 
My strength’s all gone, 
but from the husk you may divine the ear 
that stood tall in the old days. Misery owns me 
now, but then great Ares and Athena 
gave me valor and man-breaking power, 
whenever I made choice of men-at-arms 
to set a trap with me for my enemies. 
Never, as I am a man, did I fear Death 
ahead, but went in foremost in the charge, 
putting a spear through any man whose legs 
were not as fast as mine. That was my element, 
war and battle. Farming I never cared for, 
nor life at home, nor fathering fair children. 
I reveled in long ships with oars; I loved 
polished lances, arrows in the skirmish, 
the shapes of doom that others shake to see. 
Carnage suited me; heaven put those things 
in me somehow. Each to his own pleasure! 
Before we young Akhaians shipped for Troy 
I led men on nine cruises in corsairs 
to raid strange coasts, and had great luck, taking 
rich spoils on the spot, and even more 
in the division. So my house grew prosperous, 
my standing therefore high among the Kretans. 
Then came the day when Zeus who views the wide world 
drew men’s eyes upon that way accurst 
that wrung the manhood from the knees of many! 
Everyone pressed me, pressed King Idomeneus 
to take command of ships for Ilion. 
No way out; the country rang with talk of it. 
So we Akhaians had nine years of war. 
In the tenth year we sacked the inner city, 
Priam’s town, and sailed for home; but heaven 
dispersed the Akhaians. Evil days for me 
were stored up in the hidden mind of Zeus. 
One month, no more, I stayed at home in joy 
with children, wife, and treasure. Lust for action 
drove me to go to sea then, in command 
of ships and gallant seamen bound for Egypt. 
Nine ships I fitted out; my men signed on 
and came to feast with me, as good shipmates, 
for six full days. Many a beast I slaughtered 
in the gods’ honor, for my friends to eat. 
Embarking on the seventh, we hauled sail 
and filled away from Krete on a fresh north wind 
effortlessly, as boats will glide down stream. 
All rigging whole and all hands well, we rested, 
letting the wind and steersmen work the ships, 
for five days; on the fifth we made the delta. 
I brought my squadron in to the river bank 
with one turn of the sweeps. There, heaven knows, 
I told the men to wait and guard the ships 
while I sent out patrols to rising ground. 
But reckless greed carried them all away 
to plunder the rich bottomlands; they bore off 
wives and children, killed what men they found. 
When this news reached the city, all who heard it 
came at dawn. On foot they came, and horsemen, 
filling the river plain with dazzle of bronze; 
and Zeus lord of lightning 
threw my men into blind panic: no one dared 
stand against that host closing around us. 
Their scything weapons left our dead in piles, 
but some they took alive, into forced labor. 
And I-ah, how I wish that I had died 
in Egypt, on that field! So many blows 
awaited me!—Well, Zeus himself inspired me; 
I wrenched my dogskin helmet off my head, 
dropped my spear, dodged out of my long shield, 
ran for the king’s chariot and swung on 
to embrace and kiss his knees. He pulled me up, 
took pity on me, placed me on the footboards, 
and drove home with me crouching there in tears. 
Aye—for the troops, in battle fury still, 
made one pass at me after another, pricking me 
with spears, hoping to kill me. But he saved me, 
for fear of the great wrath of Zeus that comes 
when men who ask asylum are given death. 
Seven years, then, my sojourn lasted there, 
and I amassed a fortune, going about 
among the openhanded Egyptians. 
But when the eighth came round, a certain 
Phoinikian adventurer came too, 
a plausible rat, who had already done 
plenty of devilry in the world. 
This fellow 
took me in completely with his schemes, 
and led me with him to Phoinikia, 
where he had land and houses. One full year 
I stayed there with him, to the month and day, 
and when fair weather came around again 
he took me in a deepsea ship for Libya, 
pretending I could help in the cargo trade; 
he meant, in fact, to trade me off, and get 
a high price for me. I could guess the game 
but had to follow him aboard. One day 
on course due west, off central Krete, the ship 
caught a fresh norther, and we ran southward 
before the wind while Zeus piled ruin ahead. 
When Krete was out of sight astern, no land 
anywhere to be seen, but sky and ocean, 
Kronion put a dark cloud in the zenith 
over the ship, and gloom spread on the sea. 
With crack on crack of thunder, he let fly 
a bolt against the ship, a direct hit, 
so that she bucked, in sacred fumes of sulphur, 
and all the men were flung into the water. 
They came up round the wreck, bobbing a while 
like petrels on the waves. No homecoming 
for these, from whom the god had turned his face! 
Stunned in the smother as I was, yet Zeus 
put into my hands the great mast of the ship— 
a way to keep from drowning. So I twined 
my arms and legs around it in the gale 
and stayed afloat nine days. On the tenth night, 
a big surf cast me up in Thesprotia. 
Pheidon the king there gave me refuge, nobly, 
with no talk of reward. His son discovered me 
exhausted and half dead with cold, and gave me 
a hand to bear me up till he reached home 
where he could clothe me in a shirt and cloak. 
In that king’s house I heard news of Odysseus, 
who lately was a guest there, passing by 
on his way home, the king said; and he showed me 
the treasure that Odysseus had brought: 
bronze, gold, and iron wrought with heavy labor— 
in that great room I saw enough to last 
Odysseus’ heirs for ten long generations. 
The man himself had gone up to Dodona 
to ask the spelling leaves of the old oak 
the will of God: how to return, that is, 
to the rich realm of Ithaka, after so long 
an absence—openly, or on the quiet. 
And, tipping wine out, Pheidon swore to me 
the ship was launched, the seamen standing by 
to take Odysseus to his land at last. 
But he had passage first for me: Thesprotians 
were Sailing, as luck had it, for Doulikhion, 
the grain-growing island; there, he said, 
they were to bring me to the king, Akastos. 
Instead, that company saw fit to plot 
foul play against me; in my wretched life 
there was to be more suffering. 
At sea, then, 
when land lay far astern, they sprang their trap. 
They’d make a slave of me that day, stripping 
cloak and tunic off me, throwing around me 
the dirty rags you see before you now. 
At evening, off the fields of Ithaka, 
they bound me, lashed me down under the decking 
with stout ship’s rope, while they all went ashore 
in haste to make their supper on the beach. 
The gods helped me to pry the lashing loose 
until it fell away. I wound my rags 
in a bundle round my head and eased myself 
down the smooth lading plank into the water, 
up to the chin, then swam an easy breast stroke 
out and around, putting that crew behind, 
and went ashore in underbrush, a thicket, 
where I lay still, making myself small. 
They raised a bitter yelling, and passed by 
several times. When further groping seemed 
useless to them, back to the ship they went 
and out to sea again. The gods were with me, 
keeping me hid; and with me when they brought me 
here to the door of one who knows the world. 
My destiny is yet to live awhile.” 
The swineherd bowed and said: 
“Ah well, poor drifter, 
you’ve made me sad for you, going back over it, 
all your hard life and wandering. That tale 
about Odysseus, though, you might have spared me; 
you will not make me believe that. 
Why must you lie, being the man you are, 
and all for nothing? 
I can see so well 
what happened to my master, sailing home! 
Surely the gods turned on him, to refuse him 
death in the field, or in his friends’ arms 
after he wound up the great war at Troy. 
They would have made a tomb for him, the Akhaians, 
and paid all honor to his son thereafter. No, 
stormwinds made off with him. No glory came to him. 
I moved here to the mountain with my swine. 
Never, now, do I go down to town 
unless I am sent for by Penélopé 
when news of some sort comes. But those who sit 
around her go on asking the old questions— 
a few who miss their master still, 
and those who eat his house up, and go free. 
For my part, I have had no heart for inquiry 
since one year an Aitolian made a fool of me. 
Exiled from land to land after some killing, 
he turned up at my door; I took him in. 
My master he had seen in Krete, he said, 
lodged with Idómeneus, while the long ships, 
leaky from gales, were laid up for repairs. 
But they were all to sail, he said, that summer, 
or the first days of fall—hulls laden deep 
with treasure, manned by crews of heroes. 
This time 
you are the derelict the Powers bring. 
Well, give up trying to win me with false news 
or flattery. If I receive and shelter you, 
it is not for your tales but for your trouble, 
and with an eye to Zeus, who guards a guest.” 
Then said that sly and guileful man, Odysseus: 
“A black suspicious heart beats in you surely; 
the man you are, not even an oath could change you. 
Come then, we’ll make a compact; let the gods 
witness it from Olympos, where they dwell. 
Upon your lord’s homecoming, if he comes 
here to this very hut, and soon— 
then give me a new outfit, shirt and cloak, 
and ship me to Doulikhion—I thought it 
a pleasant island. But if Odysseus 
fails to appear as I predict, then Swish! 
let the slaves pitch me down from some high rock, 
so the next poor man who comes will watch his tongue.” 
The forester gave a snort and answered: 
“Friend, 
if I agreed to that, a great name 
I should acquire in the world for goodness— 
at one stroke and forever: your kind host 
who gave you shelter and the hand of friendship, 
only to take your life next day! 
How confidently, after that, should I 
address my prayers to Zeus, the son of Kronos! 
It is time now for supper. My young herdsmen 
should be arriving soon to set about it. 
We'll make a quiet feast here at our hearth.” 
At this point in their talk the swine had come 
up to the clearing, and the drovers followed 
to pen them for the night—the porkers squealing 
to high heaven, milling around the yard. 
The swineherd then gave orders to his men: 
“Bring in our best pig for a stranger’s dinner. 
A feast will do our hearts good, too; we know 
grief and pain, hard scrabbling with our swine, 
while the outsiders live on our labor.” 
Bronze 
axe in hand, he turned to split up kindling, 
while they drove in a tall boar, prime and fat, 
planting him square before the fire. The gods, 
as ever, had their due in the swineherd’s thought, 
for he it was who tossed the forehead bristles 
as a first offering on the flames, calling 
upon the immortal gods to let Odysseus 
reach his home once more. 
Then he stood up 
and brained the boar with split oak from the woodpile. 
Life ebbed from the beast; they slaughtered him, 
singed the carcass, and cut out the joints. 
Eumaios, taking flesh from every quarter, 
put lean strips on the fat of sacrifice, 
floured each one with barley meal, and cast it 
into the blaze. The rest they sliced and skewered, 
roasted with care, then took it off the fire 
and heaped it up on platters. Now their chief, 
who knew best the amenities, rose to serve, 
dividing all that meat in seven portions— 
one to be set aside, with proper prayers, 
for the wood nymphs and Hermes, Maia’s son; 
the others for the company. Odysseus 
he honored with long slices from the chine— 
warming the master’s heart. Odysseus looked at him 
and said: 
“May you be dear to Zeus 
as you are dear to me for this, Eumaios, 
favoring with choice cuts a man like me.” 
And—O my swineherd!—you replied, Eumaios: 
“Bless you, stranger, fall to and enjoy it 
for what it is. Zeus grants us this or that, 
or else refrains from granting, as he wills; 
all things are in his power.” 
He cut and burnt 
a morsel for the gods who are young forever, 
tipped out some wine, then put it in the hands 
of Odysseus, the old soldier, raider of cities, , 
who sat at ease now with his meat before him. 
As for the loaves, Mesatilios dealt them out, 
a yard boy, bought by the swineherd on his own, 
unaided by his mistress or Laértés, 
from Taphians, while Odysseus was away. 
Now all hands reached for that array of supper, 
until, when hunger and thirst were turned away 
Mesatilios removed the bread and, heavy 
with food and drink, they settled back to rest. 
Now night had come on, rough, with no moon, 
but a nightlong downpour setting in, the rainwind 
blowing hard from the west. Odysseus 
began to talk, to test the swineherd, trying 
to put it in his head to take his cloak off 
and lend it, or else urge the others to. 
He knew the man’s compassion. 
“Listen,” he said, 
“Eumaios, and you others, here’s a wishful 
tale that I shall tell. The wine’s behind it, 
vaporing wine, that makes a serious man 
break down and sing, kick up his heels and clown, 
or tell some story that were best untold. 
But now I’m launched, I can’t stop now. 
Would god I felt 
the hot blood in me that I had at Troy! 
Laying an ambush near the walls one time, 
Odysseus and Menelaos were commanders 
and I ranked third. I went at their request. 
We worked in toward the bluffs and battlements 
and, circling the town, got into canebrakes, 
thick and high, a marsh where we took cover, 
hunched under arms. 
The northwind dropped, and night 
came black and wintry. A fine sleet descending 
whitened the cane like hoarfrost, and clear ice 
grew dense upon our shields. The other men, 
all wrapt in blanket cloaks as well as tunics, 
rested well, in shields up to their shoulders, 
but I had left my cloak with friends in camp, 
foolhardy as I was. No chance of freezing hard, 
I thought, so I wore kilts and a shield only. 
But in the small hours of the third watch, when stars 
that rise at evening go down to their setting, 
I nudged Odysseus, who lay close beside me; 
he was alert then, listening, and I said: 
‘Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
I cannot hold on long among the living. 
The cold is making a corpse of me. Some god 
inveigled me to come without a cloak. 
No help for it now; too late.’ 
Next thing I knew 
he had a scheme all ready in his mind— 
and what a man he was for schemes and battles! 
Speaking under his breath to me, he murmured: 
‘Quiet; none of the rest should hear you.’ 
Then, 
propping his head on his forearm, he said: 
‘Listen, lads, I had an ominous dream, 
the point being how far forward from our ships 
and lines we’ve come. Someone should volunteer 
to tell the corps commander, Agamemnon; 
he may reinforce us from the base.’ 
At this, 
Thoas jumped up, the young son of Andraimon, 
put down his crimson cloak and headed off, 
running shoreward. 
Wrapped in that man’s cloak 
how gratefully I lay in the bitter dark 
until the dawn came stitched in gold! I wish 
I had that sap and fiber in me now!” 
Then—O my swineherd!—you replied, Eumaios: 
“That was a fine story, and well told, 
not a word out of place, not a pointless word. 
No, you’ll not sleep cold for lack of cover, 
or any other comfort one should give 
to a needy guest. However, in the morning, 
you must go flapping in the same old clothes. 
Shirts and cloaks are few here; every man 
has one change only. When our prince arrives, 
the son of Odysseus, he will make you gifts— 
cloak, tunic, everything—and grant you passage 
wherever you care to go.” 
On this he rose 
and placed the bed of balsam near the fire, 
strewing sheepskins on top, and skins of goats. 
Odysseus lay down. His host threw over him 
a heavy blanket cloak, his own reserve 
against the winter wind when it came wild. 
So there Odysseus dropped off to sleep, 
while herdsmen slept nearby. But not the swineherd: 
not in the hut could he lie down in peace, 
but now equipped himself for the night outside; 
and this rejoiced Odysseus’ heart, to see him 
care for the herd so, while his lord was gone. 
He hung a sharp sword from his shoulder, gathered 
a great cloak round him, close, to break the wind, 
and pulled a shaggy goatskin on his head. 
Then, to keep at a distance dogs or men, 
he took a sharpened lance, and went to rest 
under a hollow rock where swine were sleeping 
out of the wind and rain. 


BOOK 15

South into Lakedaimon 
into the land where greens are wide for dancing 
Athena went, to put in mind of home 
her great-hearted hero’s honored son, 
rousing him to return. 
And there she found him 
with Nestor’s lad in the late night at rest 
under the portico of Menelaos, 
the famous king. Stilled by the power of slumber 
the son of Nestor lay, but honeyed sleep 
had not yet taken in her arms Telémakhos. 
All through the starlit night, with open eyes, 
he pondered what he had heard about his father, 
until at his bedside grey-eyed Athena 
towered and said: 
“The brave thing now, Telémakhos, 
would be to end this journey far from home. 
All that you own you left behind 
with men so lost to honor in your house 
they may devour it all, shared out among them. 
How will your journey save you then? 
Go quickly 
to the lord of the great war cry, Menelaos; 
press him to send you back. You may yet find 
the queen your mother in her rooms alone. 
It seems her father and her kinsmen say 
Eurymakhos is the man for her to marry. 
He has outdone the suitors, all the rest, 
in gifts to her, and made his pledges double. 
Check him, or he will have your lands and chattels 
in spite of you. 
You know a woman’s pride 
at bringing riches to the man she marries. 
As to her girlhood husband, her first children, 
he is forgotten, being dead—and they 
no longer worry her. 
So act alone. 
Go back; entrust your riches to the servant 
worthiest in your eyes, until the gods 
make known what beauty you yourself shall marry. 
This too I have to tell you: now take heed: 
the suitors’ ringleaders are hot for murder, 
waiting in the channel between Ithaka 
and Same’s rocky side; they mean to kill you 
before you can set foot ashore. I doubt 
they'll bring it off. Dark earth instead 
may take to her cold bed a few brave suitors 
who preyed upon your cattle. 
Bear well out 
in your good ship, to eastward of the islands, 
and sail again by night. Someone immortal 
who cares for you will make a fair wind blow. 
Touch at the first beach, go ashore, and send 
your ship and crew around to port by sea, 
while you go inland to the forester, 
your old friend, loyal keeper of the swine. 
Remain that night with him; send him to town 
to tell your watchful mother Penélopé 
that you are back from Pylos safe and sound.” 
With this Athena left him for Olympos. 
He swung his foot across and gave a kick 
and said to the son of Nestor: 
“Open your eyes, 
Peisistratos. Get our team into harness. 
We have a long day’s journey.” 
Nestor’s son 
turned over and answered him: 
“Tt is still night, 
and no moon. Can we drive now? We can not, 
itch as we may for the road home. Dawn is near. 
Allow the captain of spearmen, Menelaos, 
time to pack our car with gifts and time 
to speak a gracious word, sending us off. 
A guest remembers all his days 
that host who makes provision for him kindly.” 
The Dawn soon took her throne of gold, and Lord 
Menelaos, clarion in battle, 
rose from where he lay beside the beauty 
of Helen with her shining hair. He strode 
into the hall nearby. 
Hearing him come, 
Odysseus’ son pulled on his snowy tunic 
over the skin, gathered his long cape 
about his breadth of shoulder like a captain, 
the heir of King Odysseus. At the door 
he stood and said: 
“Lord Marshal, Menelaos, 
send me home now to my own dear country: 
longing has come upon me to go home.” 
The lord of the great war cry said at once: 
“If you are longing to go home, Telémakhos, 
I would not keep you for the world, not I. 
I'd think myself or any other host 
as ill-mannered for over-friendliness 
as for hostility. 
Measure is best in everything. 
To send a guest packing, or cling to him 
when he’s in haste—one sin equals the other. 
‘Good entertaining ends with no detaining.’ 
Only let me load your car with gifts 
and fine ones, you shall see. 
I'll bid the women 
, set out breakfast from the larder stores; 
honor and appetite—we’ll attend to both 
before a long day’s journey overland. 
Or would you care to try the Argive midlands 
and Hellas, in my company? I’ll harness 
my own team, and take you through the towns. 
Guests like ourselves no lord will turn away; 
each one will make one gift, at least, 
to carry home with us: tripod or cauldron 
wrought in bronze, mule team, or golden cup.” 
Clearheaded Telémakhos replied: 
“Lord Marshal 
Menelaos, royal son of Atreus, 
I must return to my own hearth. I left 
no one behind as guardian of my property. 
This going abroad for news of a great father— 
heaven forbid it be my own undoing, 
or any precious thing be lost at home.” 
At this the tall king, clarion in battle, 
called to his lady and her waiting women 
to give them breakfast from the larder stores. 
Etedneus, the son of Boethoés, came 
straight from bed, from where he lodged nearby, 
and Menelaos ordered a fire lit 
for broiling mutton. The king’s man obeyed. 
Then down to the cedar chamber Meneláos 
walked with Helen and Prince Megapenthes. 
Amid the gold he had in that place lying 
the son of Atreus picked a wine cup, wrought 
with handles left and right, and told his son 
to take a silver winebowl. 
Helen lingered 
near the deep coffers filled with gowns, her own 
handiwork. 
Tall goddess among women, 
she lifted out one robe of state so royal, 
adorned and brilliant with embroidery, 
deep in the chest it shimmered like a star. 
Now all three turned back to the door to greet 
Telémakhos. And red-haired Menelaos 
cried out to him: 
“O prince Telémakhos, 
may Héra’s Lord of Thunder see you home 
and bring you to the welcome you desire! 
Here are your gifts—perfect and precious things 
I wish to make your own, out of my treasure.” 
And gently the great captain, son of Atreus, 
handed him the goblet. Megapenthes 
carried the winebow] glinting silvery 
to set before him, and the Lady Helen 
drew near, so that he saw her cheek’s pure line. 
She held the gown and murmured: 
“I, too, 
bring you a gift, dear child, and here it is; 
remember Helen’s hands by this; keep it 
for your own bride, your joyful wedding day; 
let your dear mother guard it in her chamber. 
My blessing: may you come soon to your island, 
home to your timbered hall.” 
So she bestowed it, 
and happily he took it. These fine things 
Peisistratos packed well in the wicker carrier, 
admiring every one. Then Menelaos 
led the two guests in to take their seats 
on thrones and easy chairs in the great hall. 
Now came a maid to tip a golden jug 
of water over a silver finger bowl, 
and draw the polished tables up beside them; 
the larder mistress brought her tray of loaves, 
with many savories to lavish on them; 
viands were served by Eteóneus, and wine 
by Menelaos’ son. Then every hand 
reached out upon good meat and drink to take them, 
driving away hunger and thirst. At last, 
Telémakhos and Nestor’s son led out 
their team to harness, mounted their bright car, 
and drove down under the echoing entrance way, 
while red-haired Menelaos, Atreus’ son, 
walked alongside with a golden cup— 
wine for the wayfarers to spill at parting. 
Then by the tugging team he stood, and spoke 
over the horses’ heads: 
“Farewell, my lads. 
Homage to Nestor, the benevolent king; 
in my time he was fatherly to me, 
when the flower of Akhaia warred on Troy.” 
Telémakhos made this reply: 
“No fear 
but we shall bear at least as far as Nestor 
your messages, great king. How I could wish 
to bring them home to Ithaka! If only 
Odysseus were there, if he could hear me tell 
of all the courtesy I have had from you, 
returning with your finery and your treasure.” 
Even as he spoke, a beat of wings went skyward 
off to the right—a mountain eagle, grappling 
a white goose in his talons, heavy prey 
hooked from a farmyard. Women and men-at-arms 
made hubbub, running up, as he flew over, 
but then he wheeled hard right before the horses— 
a sight that made the whole crowd cheer, with hearts 
lifting in joy. Peisistratos called out: 
“Read us the sign, O Menelaos, Lord 
Marshal of armies! Was the god revealing 
something thus to you, or to ourselves?” 
At this the old friend of the god of battle 
groped in his mind for the right thing to say, 
but regal Helen put in quickly: 
“Listen: 
I can tell you—tell what the omen means, 
as light is given me, and as I see it 
point by point fulfilled. The beaked eagle 
flew from the wild mountain of his fathers 
to take for prey the tame house bird. Just so, 
Odysseus, back from his hard trials and wandering, 
will soon come down in fury on his house. 
He may be there today, and a black hour 
he brings upon the suitors.” 
Telémakhos gazed and said: 
“May Zeus, the lord of Hera, 
make it so! In far-off Ithaka, all my life, 
I shall invoke you as a goddess, lady.” 
He let the whip fall, and the restive mares 
broke forward at a canter through the town 
into the open country. 
All that day 
they kept their harness shaking, side by side, 
until at sundown when the roads grew dim 
they made a halt at Pherai. There Didklés 
son of Ortilokhos whom Alpheios fathered, 
welcomed the young men, and they slept the night. 
Up when the young Dawn’s finger tips of rose 
opened in the east, they hitched the team 
once more to the painted car 
and steered out westward through the echoing gate, 
whipping their fresh horses into a run. 
Approaching Pylos Height at that day’s end, 
Telémakhos appealed to the son of Nestor: 
“Could you, I wonder, do a thing TIl tell you, 
supposing you agree? 
We take ourselves to be true friends—in age 
alike, and bound by ties between our fathers, 
and now by partnership in this adventure. 
Prince, do not take me roundabout, 
but leave me at the ship, else the old king 
your father will detain me overnight 
for love of guests, when I should be at sea.” 
The son of Nestor nodded, thinking swiftly 
how best he could oblige his friend. 
Here was his choice: to pull the team hard over 
along the beach till he could rein them in 
beside the ship. Unloading Menelaos’ 
royal keepsakes into the stern sheets, 
he sang out: 
“Now for action! Get aboard, 
and call your men, before I break the news 
at home in hall to father. Who knows better 
the old man’s heart than I? If you delay, 
he will not let you go, but he’ll descend on you 
in person and imperious; no turning 
back with empty hands for him, believe me, 
once his blood is up.” 
He shook the reins 
to the lovely mares with long manes in the wind, 
guiding them full tilt toward his father’s hall. 
Telémakhos called in the crew, and told them: 
“Get everything shipshape aboard this craft; 
we pull out now, and put sea miles behind us.” 
The listening men obeyed him, climbing in 
to settle on their benches by the rowlocks, 
while he stood watchful by the stern. He poured out 
offerings there, and prayers to Athena. 
Now a strange man came up to him, an easterner 
fresh from spilling blood in distant Argos, 
a hunted man. Gifted in prophecy, 
he had as forebear that Melampous, wizard 
who lived of old in Pylos, mother city 
of western flocks. 
Melampous, a rich lord, 
had owned a house unmatched among the Pylians, 
until the day came when king Neleus, noblest 
in that age, drove him from his native land. 
And Neleus for a year’s term sequestered 
Melampous’ fields and flocks, while he lay bound 
hand and foot in the keep of Phylakos. 
Beauty of Neleus’ daughter put him there 
and sombre folly the inbreaking Fury 
thrust upon him. But he gave the slip 
to death, and drove the bellowing herd of Iphiklos 
from Phylaké to Pylos, there to claim 
the bride that ordeal won him from the king. 
He led her to his brother’s house, and went on 
eastward into another land, the bluegrass 
plain of Argos. Destiny held for him 
rule over many Argives. Here he married, 
built a great manor house, fathered Antiphates 
and Mantios, commanders both, of whom 
Antiphatés begot Oikleies 
and Oikleiés the firebrand Amphiaraos. 
This champion the lord of stormcloud, Zeus, 
and strong Apollo loved; nor had he ever 
to cross the doorsill into dim old age. 
A woman, bought by trinkets, gave him over 
to be cut down in the assault on Thebes. 
His sons were Alkmaon and Amphilokhos. 
In the meantime Lord Mantios begot 
Polypheides, the prophet, and 
Kleitos—famous name! For Dawn in silks 
of gold carried off Kleitos for his beauty 
to live among the gods. But Polypheidés, 
high-hearted and exalted by Apollo 
above all men for prophecy, withdrew 
to Hyperesia when his father angered him. 
He lived on there, foretelling to the world 
the shape of things to come. 
His son it was, 
Theoklymenos, who came upon Telémakhos 
as he poured out the red wine in the sand 
near his trim ship, with prayer to Athena; 
and he called out, approaching: 
“Friend, well met 
here at libation before going to sea. 
I pray you by the wine you spend, and by 
your god, your own life, and your company; 
enlighten me, and let the truth be known. 
Who are you? Of what city and what parents?” 
Telémakhos turned to him and replied: 
“Stranger, as truly as may be, I’ll tell you. 
I am from Ithaka, where I was born; 
my father is, or he once was, Odysseus. 
But he’s a long time gone, and dead, may be; 
and that is what I took ship with my friends 
to find out—for he left long years ago.” 
Said Theoklymenos in reply: 
“T too 
have had to leave my home. I killed a cousin. 
In the wide grazing lands of Argos live 
many kinsmen of his and friends in power, 
great among the Akhaians. These I fled. 
Death and vengeance at my back, as Fate 
has turned now, I came wandering overland. 
Give me a plank aboard your ship, I beg, 
or they will kill me. They are on my track.” 
Telémakhos made answer: 
“No two ways 
about it. Will I pry you from our gunnel 
when you are desperate to get to sea? 
Come aboard; share what we have, and welcome.” 
He took the bronze-shod lance from the man’s hand 
and laid it down full-length on deck; then swung 
his own weight after it aboard the cutter, 
taking position aft, making a place 
for Theoklymenos near him. The stern lines 
were slacked off, and Telémakhos commanded: 
“Rig the mast; make sail!” Nimbly they ran 
to push the fir pole high and step it firm 
amidships in the box, make fast the forestays, 
and hoist aloft the white sail on its halyards. 
A following wind came down from grey-eyed Athena, 
blowing brisk through heaven, and so steady 
the cutter lapped up miles of salt blue sea, 
passing Krounoi abeam and Khalkis estuary 
at sundown when the sea ways all grew dark. 
Then, by Athena’s wind borne on, the ship 
rounded Pheai by night and coasted Elis, 
the green domain of the Epeioi; thence 
he put her head north toward the running pack 
of islets, wondering if by sailing wide 
he sheered off Death, or would be caught. 
That night 
Odysseus and the swineherd supped again 
with herdsmen in their mountain hut. At ease 
when appetite and thirst were turned away, 
Odysseus, while he talked, observed the swineherd 
to see if he were hospitable still— 
if yet again the man would make him stay 
under his roof, or send him off to town. 
“Listen,” he said, “Eumaios; listen, lads. 
At daybreak I must go and try my luck 
around the port. I burden you too long. 
Direct me, put me on the road with someone. 
Nothing else for it but to play the beggar 
in populous parts. I’ll get a cup or loaf, 
maybe from some householder. If I go 
as far as the great hall of King Odysseus 
I might tell Queen Penélopé my news. 
Or I can drift inside among the suitors 
to see what alms they give, rich as they are. 
If they have whims, I’m deft in ways of service— 
that I can say, and you may know for sure. 
By grace of Hermés the Wayfinder, patron 
of mortal tasks, the god who honors toil, 
no man can do a chore better than I can. 
Set me to build a fire, or chop wood, 
cook or carve, mix wine and serve—or anything 
inferior men attend to for the gentry.” 
Now you were furious at this, Eumaios, 
and answered—O my swineherd!— 
“Friend, friend, 
how could this fantasy take hold of you? 
You dally with your life, and nothing less, 
if you feel drawn to mingle in that company— 
reckless, violent, and famous for it 
out to the rim of heaven. Slaves 
they have, but not like you. No—theirs are boys 
in fresh cloaks and tunics with pomade 
ever on their sleek heads, and pretty faces. 
These are their minions, while their tables gleam 
and groan under big roasts, with loaves and wine. 
Stay with us here. No one is burdened by you, 
neither myself nor any of my hands. 
Wait here until Odysseus’ son returns. 
You shall have clothing from him, cloak and tunic, 
and passage where your heart desires to go.” 
The noble and enduring man replied: 
“May you be dear to Zeus for this, Eumaios, 
even as you are to me. Respite from pain 
you give me—and from homelessness. In life 
there’s nothing worse than knocking about the world, 
no bitterness we vagabonds are spared 
when the curst belly rages! Well, you master it 
and me, making me wait for the king’s son. 
But now, come, tell me: 
what of Odysseus’ mother, and his father 
whom he took leave of on the sill of age? 
Are they under the sun’s rays, living still, 
or gone down long ago to lodge with Death?” 
To this the rugged herdsman answered: 
“Aye, 
that I can tell you; it is briefly told. 
Laértés lives, but daily in his hall 
prays for the end of life and soul’s delivery, 
heartbroken as he is for a son long gone 
and for his lady. Sorrow, when she died, 
aged and enfeebled him like a green tree stricken; 
but pining for her son, her brilliant son, 
wore out her life. 
Would god no death so sad 
might come to benefactors dear as she! 
I loved always to ask and hear about her 
while she lived, although she lived in sorrow. 
For she had brought me up with her own daughter, 
Princess Ktimene, her youngest child. 
We were alike in age and nursed as equals 
nearly, till in the flower of our years 
they gave her, married her, to a Samian prince, 
taking his many gifts. For my own portion 
her mother gave new clothing, cloak and sandals, 
and sent me to the woodland. Well she loved me. 
Ah, how I miss that family! It is true 
the blissful gods prosper my work; I have 
meat and drink to spare for those I prize; 
but so removed I am, I have no speech 
with my sweet mistress, now that evil days 
and overbearing men darken her house. 
Tenants all hanker for good talk and gossip 
around their lady, and a snack in hall, 
a cup or two before they take the road 
to their home acres, each one bearing home 
some gift to cheer his heart.” 
The great tactician answered: 
“You were still a child, I see, 
when exiled somehow from your parents’ land. 
Tell me, had it been sacked in war, the city 
of spacious ways in which they made their home, 
your father and your gentle mother? Or 
were you kidnapped alone, brought here by sea 
huddled with sheep in some foul pirate squadron, 
to this landowner’s hall? He paid your ransom?” 
The master of the woodland answered: 
“Friend, 
now that you show an interest in that matter, 
attend me quietly, be at your ease, 
and drink your wine. These autumn nights are long, 
ample for story-telling and for sleep. 
You need not go to bed before the hour; 
sleeping from dusk to dawn’s a dull affair. 
Let any other here who wishes, though, 
retire to rest. At daybreak let him breakfast 
and take the king’s own swine into the wilderness. 
Here’s a tight roof; we'll drink on, you and I, 
and ease our hearts of hardships we remember, 
sharing old times. In later days a man 
can find a charm in old adversity, 
exile and pain. As to your question, now: 
A certain island, Syrié by name— 
you may have heard the name—lies off Ortygia 
due west, and holds the sunsets of the year. 
Not very populous, but good for grazing 
sheep and kine; rich too in wine and grain. 
No dearth is ever known there, no disease 
wars on the folk, of ills that plague mankind; 
but when the townsmen reach old age, Apollo 
with his longbow of silver comes, and Artemis, 
showering arrows of mild death. 
Two towns 
divide the farmlands of that whole domain, 
and both were ruled by Ktésios, my father, 
Orménos’ heir, and a great godlike man. 
Now one day some of those renowned seafaring 
men, sea-dogs, Phoinikians, came ashore 
with bags of gauds for trading. Father had 
in our household a woman of Phoinikia, 
a handsome one, and highly skilled. Well, she 
gave in to the seductions of those rovers. 
One of them found her washing near the mooring 
and lay with her, making such love to her 
as women in their frailty are confused by, 
even the best of them. 
In due course, then, 
he asked her who she was and where she hailed from: 
and nodding toward my father’s roof, she said: 
‘I am of Sidon town, smithy of bronze 
for all the East. Arubas Pasha’s daughter. 
Taphian pirates caught me in a byway 
and sold me into slavery overseas 
in this man’s home. He could afford my ransom.’ 
The sailor who had lain with her replied: 
‘Why not ship out with us on the run homeward, 
and see your father’s high-roofed hall again, 
your father and your mother? Still in Sidon 
and still rich, they are said to be.’ 
She answered: 
‘It could be done, that, if you sailors take 
oath IIl be given passage home unharmed.’ 
Well, soon she had them swearing it all pat 
as she desired, repeating every syllable, 
whereupon she warned them: 
‘Not a word 
about our meeting here! Never call out to me 
when any of you see me in the lane 
or at the well. Some visitor might bear 
tales to the old man. If he guessed the truth, 
Pd be chained up, your lives would be in peril. 
No: keep it secret. Hurry with your peddling, 
and when your hold is filled with livestock, send 
a message to me at the manor hall. 
Gold Ill bring, whatever comes to hand, 
and something else, too, as my passage fee— 
the master’s child, my charge: a boy so high, 
bright for his age; he runs with me on errands. 
Pd take him with me happily; his price 
would be I know not what in sale abroad.’ 
Her bargain made, she went back to the manor. 
But they were on the island all that year, 
getting by trade a cargo of our cattle; 
until, the ship at length being laden full, 
ready for sea, they sent a messenger 
to the Phoinikians woman. Shrewd he was, 
this fellow who came round my father’s hall, 
showing a golden chain all strung with amber, 
a necklace. Maids in waiting and my mother 
passed it from hand to hand, admiring it, 
engaging they would buy it. But that dodger, 
as soon as he had caught the woman’s eye 
and nodded, slipped away to join the ship. 
She took my hand and led me through the court 
into the portico. There by luck she found 
winecups and tables still in place—for Father’s 
attendant counselors had dined just now 
before they went to the assembly. Quickly 
she hid three goblets in her bellying dress 
to carry with her while I tagged along 
in my bewilderment. The sun went down 
and all the lanes grew dark as we descended, 
skirting the harbor in our haste to where 
those traders of Phoinikia held their ship. 
All went aboard at once and put to sea, 
taking the two of us. A favoring wind 
blew from the power of heaven. We sailed on 
six nights and days without event. Then Zeus 
the son of Kronos added one more noon—and sudden 
arrows from Artemis pierced the woman’s heart. 
Stone-dead she dropped 
into the sloshing bilge the way a tern 
plummets; and the sailors heaved her over 
as tender pickings for the seals and fish. 
Now I was left in dread, alone, while wind 
and current bore them on to Ithaka. 
Laértés purchased me. That was the way 
I first laid eyes upon this land.” 
Odysseus, the kingly man, replied: 
“You rouse my pity, 
telling what you endured when you were young. 
But surely Zeus put good alongside ill: 
torn from your own far home, you had the luck 
to come into a kind man’s service, generous 
with food and drink. And a good life you lead, 
unlike my own, all spent in barren roaming 
from one country to the next, till now.” 
So the two men talked on, into the night, 
leaving few hours for sleep before the Dawn 
stepped up to her bright chair. 
The ship now drifting 
under the island lee, Telémakhos’ 
companions took in sail and mast, unshipped 
the oars and rowed ashore. They moored her stern 
by the stout hawser lines, tossed out the bow stones, 
and waded in beyond the wash of ripples 
to mix their wine and cook their morning meal. 
When they had turned back hunger and thirst, Telémakhos 
arose to give the order of the day. 
“Pull for the town,” he said, “and berth our ship, 
while I go inland across country. Later, 
this evening, after looking at my farms, 
I'll join you in the city. When day comes 
I hope to celebrate our crossing, feasting 
everyone on good red meat and wine.” 
His noble passenger, Theoklymenos, 
now asked: 
“What as to me, my dear young fellow, 
where shall I go? Will I find lodging here 
with some one of the lords of stony Ithaka? 
Or go straight to your mother’s hall and yours?” 
Telémakhos turned round to him and said: 
“T should myself invite you to our hall 
if things were otherwise; there’d be no lack 
of entertainment for you. As it stands, 
no place could be more wretched for a guest 
while Im away. Mother will never see you; 
she almost never shows herself at home 
to the suitors there, but stays in her high chamber 
weaving upon her loom. No, let me name 
another man for you to go to visit: 
Eurymakhos, the honored son of Pélybos. 
In Ithaka they are dazzled by him now— 
the strongest of their princes, bent on making 
mother and all Odysseus’ wealth his own. 
Zeus on Olympos only knows 
if some dark hour for them will intervene.” 
The words were barely spoken, when a hawk, 
Apollo’s courier, flew up on the right, 
clutching a dove and plucking her—so feathers 
floated down to the ground between Telémakhos 
and the moored cutter. Theoklymenos 
called him apart and gripped his hand, whispering: 
“A god spoke in this bird-sign on the right. 
I knew it when I saw the hawk fly over us. 
There is no kinglier house than yours, Telémakhos, 
here in the realm of Ithaka. Your family 
will be in power forever.” 
The young prince, 
clear in spirit, answered: 
“Be it so, 
friend, as you say. And may you know as well 
the friendship of my house, and many gifts 
from me, so everyone may call you fortunate.” 
He called a trusted crewman named Peiraios, 
and said to him: 
“Peiraios, son of Klytios, 
can I rely on you again as ever, most 
of all the friends who sailed with me to Pylos? 
Take this man home with you, take care of him, 
treat him with honor, till I come.” 
To this 
Peiraios the good spearman answered: 
“Aye, 
stay in the wild country while you will, 
I shall be looking after him, Telémakhos, 
He will not lack good lodging.” 
Down to the ship 
he turned, and boarded her, and called the others 
to cast off the stern lines and come aboard. 
So men climbed in to sit beside the rowlocks. 
Telémakhos now tied his sandals on 
and lifted his tough spear from the ship’s deck; 
hawsers were taken in, and they shoved off 
to reach the town by way of the open sea 
as he commanded them—royal Odysseus’ 
own dear son, Telémakhos, 
On foot 
and swiftly he went up toward the stockade 
where swine were penned in hundreds, and at night 
the guardian of the swine, the forester, 
slept under arms on duty for his masters. 


BOOK 16

But there were two men in the mountain hut— 
Odysseus and the swineherd. At first light 
blowing their fire up, they cooked their breakfast 
and sent their lads out, driving herds to root 
in the tall timber. 
When Telémakhos came, 
the wolvish troop of watchdogs only fawned on him 
as he advanced. Odysseus heard them go 
and heard the light crunch of a man’s footfall— 
at which he turned quickly to say: 
“Eumaios, 
here is one of your crew come back, or maybe 
another friend: the dogs are out there snuffling 
belly down; not one has even growled. 
I can hear footsteps—” 
But before he finished 
his tall son stood at the door. 
The swineherd 
rose in surprise, letting a bowl and jug 
tumble from his fingers. Going forward, 
he kissed the young man’s head, his shining eyes 
and both hands, while his own tears brimmed and fell. 
Think of a man whose dear and only son, 
born to him in exile, reared with labor, 
has lived ten years abroad and now returns: 
how would that man embrace his son! Just so 
the herdsman clapped his arms around Telémakhos 
and covered him with kisses—for he knew 
the lad had got away from death. He said: 
“Light of my days, Telémakhos, 
you made it back! When you took ship for Pylos 
I never thought to see you here again. 
Come in, dear child, and let me feast my eyes; 
here you are, home from the distant places! 
How rarely anyway, you visit us, 
your own men, and your own woods and pastures! 
Always in the town, a man would think 
you loved the suitors’ company, those dogs!” 
Telémakhos with his clear candor said: 
“I am with you, Uncle. See now, I have come 
because I wanted to see you first, to hear from you 
if Mother stayed at home—or is she married 
off to someone and Odysseus’ bed 
left empty for some gloomy spider’s weaving?” 
Gently the forester replied to this: 
“At home indeed your mother is, poor lady, 
still in the women’s hall. Her nights and days 
are wearied out with grieving.” 
Stepping back 
he took the bronze-shod lance, and the young prince 
entered the cabin over the worn door stone. 
Odysseus moved aside, yielding his couch, 
but from across the room Telémakhos checked him: 
“Friend, sit down; we'll find another chair 
in our own hut. Here is the man to make one!” 
The swineherd, when the quiet man sank down, 
built a new pile of evergreens and fleeces— 
a couch for the dear son of great Odysseus— 
then gave them trenchers of good meat, left over 
from the roast pork of yesterday, and heaped up 
willow baskets full of bread, and mixed 
an ivy bowl of honey-hearted wine. 
Then he in turn sat down, facing Odysseus, 
their hands went out upon the meat and drink 
as they fell to, ridding themselves of hunger, 
until Telémakhos paused and said: 
“Oh, Uncle, 
what’s your friend’s home port? How did he come? 
Who were the sailors brought him here to Ithaka? 
I doubt if he came walking on the sea.” 
And you replied, Eumaios—O my swineherd— 
“Son, the truth about him is soon told. 
His home land, and a broad land, too, is Krete, 
but he has knocked about the world, he says, 
for years, as the Powers wove his life. Just now 
he broke away from a shipload of Thesprotians 
to reach my hut. I place him in your hands. 
Act as you will. He wishes your protection.” 
The young man said: 
“Eumaios, my protection! 
The notion cuts me to the heart. How can I 
receive your friend at home? I am not old enough 
or trained in arms. Could I defend myself 
if someone picked a fight with me? 
Besides, 
mother is in a quandary, whether to stay with me 
as mistress of our household, honoring 
her lord’s bed, and opinion in the town, 
or take the best Akhaian who comes her way— 
the one who offers most. 
Pll undertake, 
at all events, to clothe your friend for winter, 
now he is with you. Tunic and cloak of wool, 
a good broadsword, and sandals—these are his. 
I can arrange to send him where he likes 
or you may keep him in your cabin here. 
I shall have bread and wine sent up; you need not 
feel any pinch on his behalf. 
Impossible 
to let him stay in hall, among the suitors. 
They are drunk, drunk on impudence, they might 
injure my guest—and how could I bear that? 
How could a single man take on those odds? 
Not even a hero could. 
The suitors are too strong.” 
At this the noble and enduring man, Odysseus, 
addressed his son: 
“Kind prince, it may be fitting 
for me to speak a word. All that you say 
gives me an inward wound as I sit listening. 
I mean this wanton game they play, these fellows, 
riding roughshod over you in your own house, 
admirable as you are. But tell me, 
are you resigned to being bled? The townsmen, 
stirred up against you, are they, by some oracle? 
Your brothers—can you say your brothers fail you? 
A man should feel his kin, at least, behind him 
in any clash, when a real fight is coming. 
If my heart were as young as yours, if I were 
son to Odysseus, or the man himself, 
Pd rather have my head cut from my shoulders 
by some slashing adversary, if I 
brought no hurt upon that crew! Suppose 
I went down, being alone, before the lot, 
better, I say, to die at home in battle 
than see these insupportable things, day after 
day the stranger cuffed, the women slaves 
dragged here and there, shame in the lovely rooms, 
the wine drunk up in rivers, sheer waste 
of pointless feasting, never at an end!” 
Telémakhos replied: 
“Friend, I’ll explain to you. 
There is no rancor in the town against me, 
no fault of brothers, whom a man should feel 
behind him when a fight is in the making; 
no, no—in our family the First Born 
of Heaven, Zeus, made single sons the rule. 
Arkeisios had but one, Laértés; he 
in his turn fathered only one, Odysseus, 
who left me in his hall alone, too young 
to be of any use to him. 
And so you see why enemies fill our house 
in these days: all the princes of the islands, 
Doulikhion, Same, wooded Zakynthos, 
Ithaka too—lords of our island rock— 
eating our house up as they court my mother. 
She cannot put an end to it; she dare not 
bar the marriage that she hates; and they 
devour all my substance and my cattle, 
and who knows when they’ll slaughter me as well? 
It rests upon the gods’ great knees. 
Uncle, 
go down at once and tell the Lady Penélopé 
that I am back from Pylos, safe and sound. 
I stay here meanwhile. You will give your message 
and then return. Let none of the Akhaians 
hear it; they have a mind to do me harm.” 
To this, Eumaios, you replied: 
“T know. 
But make this clear, now—should I not likewise 
call on Laértés with your news? Hard hit 
by sorrow though he was, mourning Odysseus, 
he used to keep an eye upon his farm. 
He had what meals he pleased, with his own folk. 
But now no more, not since you sailed for Pylos; 
he has not taken food or drink, I hear, 
sitting all day, blind to the work of harvest, 
groaning, while the skin shrinks on his bones.” 
Telémakhos answered: 
“One more misery, 
but we had better leave it so. 
If men could choose, and have their choice, in everything, 
we'd have my father home. 
Turn back 
when you have done your errand, as you must, 
not to be caught alone in the countryside. 
But wait—you may tell Mother 
to send our old housekeeper on the quiet 
and quickly; she can tell the news to Grandfather.” 
The swineherd, roused, reached out to get his sandals, 
tied them on, and took the road. 
Who else 
beheld this but Athena? From the air 
she walked, taking the form of a tall woman, 
handsome and clever at her craft, and stood 
beyond the gate in plain sight of Odysseus, 
unseen, though, by Telémakhos, unguessed, 
for not to everyone will gods appear. 
Odysseus noticed her; so did the dogs, 
who cowered whimpering away from her. She only 
nodded, signing to him with her brows, 
a sign he recognized. Crossing the yard, 
he passed out through the gate in the stockade 
to face the goddess. There she said to him: 
“Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
dissemble to your son no longer now. 
The time has come: tell him how you together 
will bring doom on the suitors in the town. 
I shall not be far distant then, for I 
myself desire battle.” 
Saying no more, 
she tipped her golden wand upon the man, 
making his cloak pure white and the knit tunic 
fresh around him. Lithe and young she made him, 
ruddy with sun, his jawline clean, the beard 
no longer grew upon his chin. And she 
withdrew when she had done. 
Then Lord Odysseus 
reappeared—and his son was thunderstruck. 
Fear in his eyes, he looked down and away 
as though it were a god, and whispered: 
“Stranger, 
you are no longer what you were just now! 
Your cloak is new; even your skin! You are 
one of the gods who rule the sweep of heaven! 
Be kind to us, we’ll make you fair oblation 
and gifts of hammered gold. Have mercy on us!” 
The noble and enduring man replied: 
“No god. Why take me for a god? No, no. 
I am that father whom your boyhood lacked 
and suffered pain for lack of. I am he.” 
Held back too long, the tears ran down his cheeks 
as he embraced his son. 
Only Telémakhos, 
uncomprehending, wild 
with incredulity, cried out: 
“You cannot 
be my father Odysseus! Meddling spirits 
conceived this trick to twist the knife in me! 
No man of woman born could work these wonders 
by his own craft, unless a god came into it 
with ease to turn him young or old at will. 
I swear you were in rags and old, 
and here you stand like one of the immortals!” 
Odysseus brought his ranging mind to bear 
and said: 
“This is not princely, to be swept 
away by wonder at your father’s presence. 
No other Odysseus will ever come, 
for he and I are one, the same; his bitter 
fortune and his wanderings are mine. 
Twenty years gone, and I am back again 
on my own island. 
As for my change of skin, 
that is a charm Athena, Hope of Soldiers, 
uses as she will; she has the knack 
to make me seem a beggar man sometimes 
and sometimes young, with finer clothes about me. 
It is no hard thing for the gods of heaven 
to glorify a man or bring him low.” 
When he had spoken, down he sat. 
Then, throwing 
his arms around this marvel of a father 
Telémakhos began to weep. Salt tears 
rose from the wells of longing in both men, 
and cries burst from both as keen and fluttering 
as those of the great taloned hawk, 
whose nestlings farmers take before they fly. 
So helplessly they cried, pouring out tears, 
and might have gone on weeping so till sundown, 
had not Telémakhos said: 
“Dear father! Tell me 
what kind of vessel put you here ashore 
on Ithaka? Your sailors, who were they? 
I doubt you made it, walking on the sea!” 
Then said Odysseus, who had borne the barren sea: 
“Only plain truth shall I tell you, child. 
Great seafarers, the Phaidkians, gave me passage 
as they give other wanderers. By night 
over the open ocean, while I slept, 
they brought me in their cutter, set me down 
on Ithaka, with gifts of bronze and gold 
and stores of woven things. By the gods’ will 
these lie all hidden in a cave. I came 
to this wild place, directed by Athena, 
so that we might lay plans to kill our enemies. 
Count up the suitors for me, let me know 
what men at arms are there, how many men. 
I must put all my mind to it, to see 
if we two by ourselves can take them on 
or if we should look round for help.” 
Telémakhos 
replied: 
“O Father, all my life your fame 
as a fighting man has echoed in my ears— 
your skill with weapons and the tricks of war— 
but what you speak of is a staggering thing, 
beyond imagining, for me. How can two men 
do battle with a houseful in their prime? 
For I must tell you this is no affair 
of ten or even twice ten men, but scores, 
throngs of them. You shall see, here and now. 
The number from Doulikhion alone 
is fifty-two picked men, with armorers, 
a half dozen; twenty-four came from Same, 
twenty from Zakynthos; our own island 
accounts for twelve, high-ranked, and their retainers, 
Medôn the crier, and the Master Harper, 
besides a pair of handymen at feasts. 
If we go in against all these 
I fear we pay in salt blood for your vengeance. 
You must think hard if you would conjure up 
the fighting strength to take us through.” 
Odysseus 
who had endured the long war and the sea 
answered: 
“TIl tell you now. 
Suppose Athena’s arm is over us, and Zeus 
her father’s, must I rack my brains for more?” 
Clearheaded Telémakhos looked hard and said: 
“Those two are great defenders, no one doubts it, 
but throned in the serene clouds overhead; 
other affairs of men and gods they have 
to rule over.” 
And the hero answered: 
“Before long they will stand to right and left of us 
in combat, in the shouting, when the test comes— 
our nerve against the suitors’ in my hall. 
Here is your part: at break of day tomorrow 
home with you, go mingle with our princes. 
The swineherd later on will take me down 
the port-side trail—a beggar, by my looks, 
hangdog and old. If they make fun of me 
in my own courtyard, let your ribs cage up 
your springing heart, no matter what I suffer, 
no matter if they pull me by the heels 
or practice shots at me, to drive me out. 
Look on, hold down your anger. You may even 
plead with them, by heaven! in gentle terms 
to quit their horseplay—not that they will heed you, 
rash as they are, facing their day of wrath. 
Now fix the next step in your mind. 
Athena, 
counseling me, will give me word, and I 
shall signal to you, nodding: at that point 
round up all armor, lances, gear of war 
left in our hall, and stow the lot away 
back in the vaulted store room. When the suitors 
miss those arms and question you, be soft 
in what you say: answer: 
‘I thought ’d move them 
out of the smoke. They seemed no longer those 
bright arms Odysseus left us years ago 
when he went off to Troy. Here where the fire’s 
hot breath came, they had grown black and drear. 
One better reason, too, I had from Zeus: 
suppose a brawl starts up when you are drunk, 
you might be crazed and bloody one another, 
and that would stain your feast, your courtship. Tempered 
iron can magnetize a man.’ 
Say that. 
But put aside two broadswords and two spears 
for our own use, two oxhide shields nearby 
when we go into action. Pallas Athena 
and Zeus All Provident will see you through, 
bemusing our young friends. 
Now one thing more. 
If son of mine you are and blood of mine, 
let no one hear Odysseus is about. 
Neither Laértés, nor the swineherd here, 
nor any slave, nor even Penelope. 
But you and I alone must learn how far 
the women are corrupted; we should know 
how to locate good men among our hands, 
the loyal and respectful, and the shirkers 
who take you lightly, as alone and young.” 
His admirable son replied: 
“Ah, Father, 
even when danger comes I think you’ll find 
courage in me. I am not scatterbrained. 
But as to checking on the field hands now, 
I see no gain for us in that. Reflect, 
you make a long toil, that way, if you care 
to look men in the eye at every farm, 
while these gay devils in our hall at ease 
eat up our flocks and herds, leaving us nothing. 
As for the maids I say, Yes: make distinction 
between good girls and those who shame your house; 
all that I shy away from is a scrutiny 
of cottagers just now. The time for that 
comes later—if in truth you have a sign 
from Zeus the Stormking.” 
So their talk ran on, 
while down the coast, and round toward Ithaka, 
hove the good ship that had gone out to Pylos 
bearing Telémakhos and his companions. 
Into the wide bay waters, on to the dark land, 
they drove her, hauled her up, took out the oars 
and canvas for light-hearted squires to carry 
homeward—as they carried, too, the gifts 
of Meneláos round to Klytios’ house. 
But first they sped a runner to Penélopé, 
They knew that quiet lady must be told 
the prince her son had come ashore, and sent 
his good ship round to port; not one soft tear 
should their sweet queen let fall. 
Both messengers, 
crewman and swineherd—reached the outer gate 
in the same instant, bearing the same news, 
and went in side by side to the king’s hall. 
He of the ship burst out among the maids: 
“Your son’s ashore this morning, O my Queen!” 
But the swineherd calmly stood near Penelope 
whispering what her son had bade him tell 
and what he had enjoined on her. No more. 
When he had done, he left the place and turned 
back to his steading in the hills. 
By now, 
sullen confusion weighed upon the suitors. 
Out of the house, out of the court they went, 
beyond the wall and gate, to sit in council. 
Eurymakhos, the son of Polybos, 
opened discussion: 
“Friends, face up to it; 
that young pup, Telémakhos, has done it; 
he made the round trip, though we said he could not. 
Well—now to get the best craft we can find 
afloat, with oarsmen who can drench her bows, 
and tell those on the island to come home.” 
He was yet speaking when Amphinomos, 
craning seaward, spotted the picket ship 
already in the roadstead under oars 
with canvas brailed up; and this fresh arrival 
made him chuckle. Then he told his friends: 
“Too late for messages. Look, here they come 
along the bay. Some god has brought them news, 
or else they saw the cutter pass—and could not 
overtake her.” 
On their feet at once, 
the suitors took the road to the sea beach, 
where, meeting the black ship, they hauled her in. 
Oars and gear they left for their light-hearted 
squires to carry, and all in company 
made off for the assembly ground. All others, 
young and old alike, they barred from sitting. 
Eupeithes’ son, Antinods, made the speech: 
“How the gods let our man escape a boarding, 
that is the wonder. 
We had lookouts posted 
up on the heights all day in the sea wind, 
and every hour a fresh pair of eyes; 
at night we never slept ashore 
but after sundown cruised the open water 
to the southeast, patrolling until Dawn. 
We were prepared to cut him off and catch him, 
squelch him for good and all. The power of heaven 
steered him the long way home. 
Well, let this company plan his destruction, 
and leave him no way out, this time. I see 
our business here unfinished while he lives. 
He knows, now, and he’s no fool. Besides, 
his people are all tired of playing up to us. 
I say, act now, before he brings the whole 
body of Akhaians to assembly— 
and he would leave no word unsaid, in righteous 
anger speaking out before them all 
of how we plotted murder, and then missed him. 
Will they commend us for that pretty work? 
Take action now, or we are in for trouble; 
we might be exiled, driven off our lands. 
Let the first blow be ours. 
If we move first, and get our hands on him 
far from the city’s eye, on path or field, 
then stores and livestock will be ours to share; 
the house we may confer upon his mother— 
and on the man who marries her. Decide 
otherwise you may—but if, my friends, 
you want that boy to live and have his patrimony, 
then we should eat no more of his good mutton, 
come to this place no more. 
Let each from his own hall 
court her with dower gifts. And let her marry 
the destined one, the one who offers most.” 
He ended, and no sound was heard among them, 
sitting all hushed, until at last the son 
of Nisos Aretiadés arose— 
Amphinomos. 
He led the group of suitors 
who came from grainlands on Doulikhion, 
and he had lightness in his talk that pleased 
Penelope, for he meant no ill. 
Now, in concern for them, he spoke: 
“O Friends 
I should not like to kill Telémakhos, 
It is a shivery thing to kill a prince 
of royal blood. 
We should consult the gods. 
If Zeus hands down a ruling for that act, 
then I shall say, ‘Come one, come all,’ and go 
cut him down with my own hand— 
but I say Halt, if gods are contrary.” 
Now this proposal won them, and it carried. 
Breaking their session up, away they went 
to take their smooth chairs in Odysseus’ house. 
Meanwhile Penelope the Wise, 
decided, for her part, to make appearance 
before the valiant young men. 
She knew now 
they plotted her child’s death in her own hall, 
for once more Medôn, who had heard them, told her. 
Into the hall that lovely lady came, 
with maids attending, and approached the suitors, 
till near a pillar of the well-wrought roof 
she paused, her shining veil across her cheeks, 
and spoke directly to Antinos: 
“Infatuate, 
steeped in evil! Yet in Ithaka they say 
you were the best one of your generation 
in mind and speech. Not so, you never were. 
Madman, why do you keep forever knitting 
death for Telémakhos? Have you no pity 
toward men dependent on another’s mercy? 
Before Lord Zeus, no sanction can be found 
for one such man to plot against another! 
Or are you not aware that your own father 
fled to us when the realm was up in arms 
against him? He had joined the Taphian pirates 
in ravaging Thesprotian folk, our friends. 
Our people would have raided him, then—breached 
his heart, butchered his herds to feast upon— 
only Odysseus took him in, and held 
the furious townsmen off. It is Odysseus’ 
house you now consume, his wife you court, 
his son you kill, or try to kill. And me 
you ravage now, and grieve. I call upon you 
to make an end of it!—and your friends too!” 
The son of Pélybos it was, Eurymakhos, 
who answered her with ready speech: 
“My lady 
Penélopé, wise daughter of Ikarios, 
you must shake off these ugly thoughts. I say 
that man does not exist, nor will, who dares 
lay hands upon your son Telémakhos, 
while I live, walk the earth, and use my eyes. 
The man’s life blood, I swear, 
will spurt and run out black around my lancehead! 
For it is true of me, too, that Odysseus, 
raider of cities, took me on his knees 
and fed me often—tidbits and red wine. 
Should not Telémakhos, therefore, be dear to me 
above the rest of men? I tell the lad 
he must not tremble for his life, at least 
alone in the suitors’ company. Heaven 
deals death no man avoids.” 
Blasphemous lies 
in earnest tones he told—the one who planned 
the lad’s destruction! 
Silently the lady 
made her way to her glowing upper chamber, 
there to weep for her dear lord, Odysseus, 
until grey-eyed Athena 
cast sweet sleep upon her eyes. 
At fall of dusk 
Odysseus and his son heard the approach 
of the good forester. They had been standing 
over the fire with a spitted pig, 
a yearling. And Athena coming near 
with one rap of her wand made of Odysseus 
an old old man again, with rags about him— 
for if the swineherd knew his lord were there 
he could not hold the news; Penelope 
would hear it from him. 
Now Telémakhos 
greeted him first: 
“Eumaios, back again! 
What was the talk in town? Are the tall suitors 
home again, by this time, from their ambush, 
or are they still on watch for my return?” 
And you replied, Eumaios—O my swineherd: 
“There was no time to ask or talk of that; 
I hurried through the town. Even while I spoke 
my message, I felt driven to return. 
A runner from your friends turned up, a crier, 
who gave the news first to your mother. Ah! 
One thing I do know; with my own two eyes 
I saw it. As I climbed above the town 
to where the sky is cut by Hermes’ ridge, 
I saw a ship bound in for our own bay 
with many oarsmen in it, laden down 
with sea provisioning and two-edged spears, 
and I surmised those were the men. 
Who knows?” 
Telémakhos, now strong with magic, smiled 
across at his own father—but avoided 
the swineherd’s eye. 
So when the pig was done, 
the spit no longer to be turned, the table 
garnished, everyone sat down to feast 
on all the savory flesh he craved. And when 
they had put off desire for meat and drink, 
they turned to bed and took the gift of sleep. 


BOOK 17

When the young Dawn came bright into the East 
spreading her finger tips of rose, Telémakhos, 
the king’s son, tied on his rawhide sandals 
and took the lance that bore his handgrip. Burning 
to be away, and on the path to town, 
he told the swineherd: 
“Uncle, the truth is 
I must go down myself into the city. 
Mother must see me there, with her own eyes, 
or she will weep and feel forsaken still, 
and will not set her mind at rest. Your job 
will be to lead this poor man down to beg. 
Some householder may want to dole him out 
a loaf and pint. I have my own troubles. 
Am I to care for every last man who comes? 
And if he takes it badly—well, so much 
the worse for him. Plain truth is what I favor.” 
At once Odysseus the great tactician 
spoke up briskly: 
“Neither would I myself 
care to be kept here, lad. A beggar man 
fares better in the town. Let it be said 
I am not yet so old I must lay up 
indoors and mumble, ‘Aye, Aye’ to a master. 
Go on, then. As you say, my friend can lead me 
as soon as I have had a bit of fire 
and when the sun grows warmer. These old rags 
could be my death, outside on a frosty morning, 
and the town is distant, so they say.” 
Telémakhos 
with no more words went out, and through the fence, 
and down hill, going fast on the steep footing, 
nursing woe for the suitors in his heart. 
Before the manor hall, he leaned his lance 
against a great porch pillar and stepped in 
across the door stone. 
Old Eurykleia 
saw him first, for that day she was covering 
handsome chairs nearby with clean fleeces. 
She ran to him at once, tears in her eyes; 
and other maidservants of the old soldier 
Odysseus gathered round to greet their prince, 
kissing his head and shoulders. 
Quickly, then, 
Penelope the Wise, tall in her beauty 
as Artemis or pale-gold Aphrodite, 
appeared from her high chamber and came down 
to throw her arms around her son. In tears 
she kissed his head, kissed both his shining eyes, 
then cried out, and her words flew: 
“Back with me! 
Telémakhos, more sweet to me than sunlight! 
I thought I should not see you again, ever, 
after you took the ship that night to Pylos— 
against my will, with not a word! you went 
for news of your dear father. Tell me now 
of everything you saw!” 
But he made answer: 
“Mother, not now. You make me weep. My heart 
already aches—I came near death at sea. 
You must bathe, first of all, and change your dress, 
and take your maids to the highest room to pray. 
Pray, and burn offerings to the gods of heaven, 
that Zeus may put his hand to our revenge. 
I am off now to bring home from the square 
a guest, a passenger I had. I sent him 
yesterday with all my crew to town. 
Peiraios was to care for him, I said, 
and keep him well, with honor, till I came.” 
She caught back the swift words upon her tongue. 
Then softly she withdrew 
to bathe and dress her body in fresh linen, 
and make her offerings to the gods of heaven, 
praying Almighty Zeus 
to put his hand to their revenge. 
Telémakhos 
had left the hall, taken his lance, and gone 
with two quick hounds at heel into the town, 
Athena’s grace in his long stride 
making the people gaze as he came near. 
And suitors gathered, primed with friendly words, 
despite the deadly plotting in their hearts— 
but these, and all their crowd, he kept away from. 
Next he saw sitting some way off, apart, 
Mentor, with Antiphos and Halitherses, 
friends of his father’s house in years gone by. 
Near these men he sat down, and told his tale 
under their questioning. 
His crewman, young Peiraios, 
guided through town, meanwhile, into the Square, 
the Argive exile, Theoklymenos. 
Telémakhos lost no time in moving toward him; 
but first Peiraios had his say: 
“Telémakhos, 
you must send maids to me, at once, and let me 
turn over to you those gifts from Meneláos!” 
The prince had pondered it, and said: 
“Peiraios, 
none of us knows how this affair will end. 
Say one day our fine suitors, without warning, 
draw upon me, kill me in our hall, 
and parcel out my patrimony—I wish 
you, and no one of them, to have those things. 
But if my hour comes, if I can bring down 
bloody death on all that crew, 
you will rejoice to send my gifts to me— 
and so will I rejoice!” 
Then he departed, 
leading his guest, the lonely stranger, home. 
Over chair-backs in hall they dropped their mantles 
and passed in to the polished tubs, where maids 
poured out warm baths for them, anointed them, 
and pulled fresh tunics, fleecy cloaks around them. 
Soon they were seated at their ease in hall. 
A maid came by to tip a golden jug 
over their fingers into a silver bowl 
and draw a gleaming table up beside them. 
The larder mistress brought her tray of loaves 
and savories, dispensing each. 
In silence 
across the hall, beside a pillar, propped 
in a long chair, Telémakhos’ mother 
spun a fine wool yarn. 
The young men’s hands 
went out upon the good things placed before them, 
and only when their hunger and thirst were gone 
did she look up and say: 
“Telémakhos, 
what am I to do now? Return alone 
and lie again on my forsaken bed— 
sodden how often with my weeping 
since that day when Odysseus put to sea 
to join the Atreidai before Troy? 
Could you not 
tell me, before the suitors fill our house, 
what news you have of his return?” 
He answered: 
“Now that you ask a second time, dear Mother, 
here is the truth. 
We went ashore at Pylos 
to Nestor, lord and guardian of the West, 
who gave me welcome in his towering hall. 
So kind he was, he might have been my father 
and I his long-lost son—so truly kind, 
taking me in with his own honored sons. 
But as to Odysseus’ bitter fate, 
living or dead, he had no news at all 
from anyone on earth, he said. He sent me 
overland in a strong chariot 
to Atreus’ son, the captain, Menelaos. 
And I saw Helen there, for whom the Argives 
fought, and the Trojans fought, as the gods willed. 
Then Menelaos of the great war cry 
asked me my errand in that ancient land 
of Lakedaimon. So I told our story, 
and in reply he burst out: 
‘Intolerable! 
That feeble men, unfit as those men are, 
should think to lie in that great captain’s bed, 
fawns in the lion’s lair! As if a doe 
put down her litter of sucklings there, while she 
sniffed at the glen or grazed a grassy hollow. 
Ha! Then the lord returns to his own bed 
and deals out wretched doom on both alike. 
So will Odysseus deal out doom on these. 
O Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo! 
I pray he comes as once he was, in Lesbos, 
when he stood up to wrestle Philomeleidés— 
champion and Island King— 
and smashed him down. How the Akhaians cheered! 
If that Odysseus could meet the suitors, 
they’d have a quick reply, a stunning dowry! 
Now for your questions, let me come to the point. 
I would not misreport it for you; let me 
tell you what the Ancient of the Sea, 
that infallible seer, told me. 
On an island 
your father lies and grieves. The Ancient saw him 
held by a nymph, Kalypso, in her hall; 
no means of sailing home remained to him, 
no ship with oars, and no ship’s company 
to pull him on the broad back of the sea.’ 
I had this from the lord marshal, Menelaos, 
and when my errand in that place was done 
I left for home. A fair breeze from the gods 
brought me swiftly back to our dear island.” 
The boy’s tale made her heart stir in her breast, 
but this was not all. Mother and son now heard 
Theoklymenos, the diviner, say: 
“He does not see it clear— 
O gentle lady, 
wife of Odysseus Laertiades, 
listen to me, I can reveal this thing. 
Zeus be my witness, and the table set 
for strangers and the hearth to which I’ve come— 
the lord Odysseus, I tell you, 
is present now, already, on this island! 
Quartered somewhere, or going about, he knows 
what evil is afoot. He has it in him 
to bring a black hour on the suitors. Yesterday, 
still at the ship, I saw this in a portent. 
I read the sign aloud, I told Telémakhos!” 
The prudent queen, for her part, said: 
“Stranger, 
if only this came true— 
our love would go to you, with many gifts; 
aye, every man who passed would call you happy!” 
So ran the talk between these three. 
Meanwhile, 
swaggering before Odysseus’ hall, 
the suitors were competing at the discus throw 
and javelin, on the level measured field. 
But when the dinner hour drew on, and beasts 
were being driven from the fields to slaughter— 
as beasts were, every day—Medôn spoke out: 
Medon, the crier, whom the suitors liked; 
he took his meat beside them. 
“Men,” he said, 
“each one has had his work-out and his pleasure, 
come in to Hall now; time to make our feast. 
Are discus throws more admirable than a roast 
when the proper hour comes?” 
At this reminder 
they all broke up their games, and trailed away 
into the gracious, timbered hall. There, first, 
they dropped their cloaks on chairs; then came their ritual: 
putting great rams and fat goats to the knife— 
pigs and a cow, too. 
So they made their feast. 
During these hours, Odysseus and the swineherd 
were on their way out of the hills to town. 
The forester had got them started, saying: 
“Friend, you have hopes, I know, of your adventure 
into the heart of town today. My lord 
wishes it so, not I. No, I should rather 
you stood by here as guardian of our steading. 
But I owe reverence to my prince, and fear 
he’ll make my ears burn later if I fail. 
A master’s tongue has a rough edge. Off we go. 
Part of the day is past; nightfall will be 
early, and colder, too.” 
Odysseus, 
who had it all timed in his head, replied: 
“T know, as well as you do. Let’s move on. 
You lead the way—the whole way. Have you got 
a staff, a lopped stick, you could let me use 
to put my weight on when I slip? This path 
is hard going, they said.” 
Over his shoulders 
he slung his patched-up knapsack, an old bundle 
tied with twine. Eumaios found a stick for him, 
the kind he wanted, and the two set out, 
leaving the boys and dogs to guard the place. 
In this way good Eumaios led his lord 
down to the city. 
And it seemed to him 
he led an old outcast, a beggar man, 
leaning most painfully upon a stick, 
his poor cloak, all in tatters, looped about him. 
Down by the stony trail they made their way 
as far as Clearwater, not far from town— 
a spring house where the people filled their jars. 
Ithakos, Neritos, and Polyktor built it, 
and round it on the humid ground a grove, 
a circular wood of poplars grew. Ice cold 
in runnels from a high rock ran the spring, 
and over it there stood an altar stone 
to the cool nymphs, where all men going by 
laid offerings. 
Well, here the son of Délios 
crossed their path—Melanthios. 
He was driving 
a string of choice goats for the evening meal, 
with two goatherds beside him; and no sooner 
had he laid eyes upon the wayfarers 
than he began to growl and taunt them both 
so grossly that Odysseus’ heart grew hot: 
“Here comes one scurvy type leading another! 
God pairs them off together, every time. 
Swineherd, where are you taking your new pig, 
that stinking beggar there, licker of pots? 
How many doorposts has he rubbed his back on 
whining for garbage, where a noble guest 
would rate a cauldron or a sword? 
Hand him 
over to me, I’ll make a farmhand of him, 
a stall scraper, a fodder carrier! Whey 
for drink will put good muscle on his shank! 
No chance: he learned his dodges long ago— 
no honest sweat. He’d rather tramp the country 
begging, to keep his hoggish belly full. 
Well, I can tell you this for sure: 
in King Odysseus’ hall, if he goes there, 
footstools will fly around his head—good shots 
from strong hands. Back and side, his ribs will catch it 
on the way out!” 
And like a drunken fool 
he kicked at Odysseus’ hip as he passed by. 
Not even jogged off stride, or off the trail, 
the Lord Odysseus walked along, debating 
inwardly whether to whirl and beat 
the life out of this fellow with his stick, 
or toss him, brain him on the stony ground. 
Then he controlled himself, and bore it quietly. 
Not so the swineherd. 
Seeing the man before him, 
he raised his arms and cried: 
“Nymphs of the spring, 
daughters of Zeus, if ever Odysseus 
burnt you a thighbone in rich fat—a ram’s 
or kid’s thighbone, hear me, grant my prayer: 
let our true lord come back, let heaven bring him 
to rid the earth of these fine courtly ways 
Melanthios picks up around the town— 
all wine and wind! Bad shepherds ruin flocks!” 
Melanthios the goatherd answered: 
“Bless me! 
The dog can snap: how he goes on! Some day 
I'll take him in a slave ship overseas 
and trade him for a herd! 
Old Silverbow 
Apollo, if he shot clean through Telémakhos 
in hall today, what luck! Or let the suitors 
cut him down! 
Odysseus died at sea; 
no coming home for him.” 
He flung this out 
and left the two behind to come on slowly, 
while he went hurrying to the king’s hall. 
There he slipped in, and sat among the suitors, 
beside the one he doted on—Eurymakhos. 
Then working servants helped him to his meat 
and the mistress of the larder gave him bread. 
Reaching the gate, Odysseus and the forester 
halted and stood outside, for harp notes came 
around them rippling on the air 
as Phémios picked out a song. Odysseus 
caught his companion’s arm and said: 
“My friend, 
here is the beautiful place—who could mistake it? 
Here is Odysseus’ hall: no hall like this! 
See how one chamber grows out of another; 
see how the court is tight with wall and coping; 
no man at arms could break this gateway down! 
Your banqueting young lords are here in force, 
I gather, from the fumes of mutton roasting 
and strum of harping—harping, which the gods 
appoint sweet friend of feasts!” 
And—O my swineherd! 
you replied: 
“That was quick recognition; 
but you are no numbskull—in this or anything. 
Now we must plan this action. Will you take 
leave of me here, and go ahead alone 
to make your entrance now among the suitors? 
Or do you choose to wait?—Let me go forward 
and go in first. 
Do not delay too long; 
someone might find you skulking here outside 
and take a club to you, or heave a lance. 
Bear this in mind, I say.” 
The patient hero 
Odysseus answered: 
“Just what I was thinking. 
You go in first, and leave me here a little. 
But as for blows and missiles, 
I am no tyro at these things. I learned 
to keep my head in hardship—years of war 
and years at sea. Let this new trial come. 
The cruel belly, can you hide its ache? 
How many bitter days it brings! Long ships 
with good stout planks athwart—would fighters rig them 
to ride the barren sea, except for hunger? 
Seawolves—woe to their enemies!” 
While he spoke 
an old hound, lying near, pricked up his ears 
and lifted up his muzzle. This was Argos, 
trained as a puppy by Odysseus, 
but never taken on a hunt before 
his master sailed for Troy. The young men, afterward, 
hunted wild goats with him, and hare, and deer, 
but he had grown old in his master’s absence. 
Treated as rubbish now, he lay at last 
upon a mass of dung before the gates— 
manure of mules and cows, piled there until 
fieldhands could spread it on the king’s estate. 
Abandoned there, and half destroyed with flies, 
old Argos lay. 
But when he knew he heard 
Odysseus’ voice nearby, he did his best 
to wag his tail, nose down, with flattened ears, 
having no strength to move nearer his master. 
And the man looked away, 
wiping a salt tear from his cheek; but he 
hid this from Eumaios. Then he said: 
“T marvel that they leave this hound to lie 
here on the dung pile; 
he would have been a fine dog, from the look of him, 
though I can’t say as to his power and speed 
when he was young. You find the same good build 
in house dogs, table dogs landowners keep 
all for style.” 
And you replied, Eumaios: 
“A hunter owned him—but the man is dead 
in some far place. If this old hound could show 
the form he had when Lord Odysseus left him, 
going to Troy, you’d see him swift and strong. 
He never shrank from any savage thing 
he’d brought to bay in the deep woods; on the scent 
no other dog kept up with him. Now misery 
has him in leash. His owner died abroad, 
and here the women slaves will take no care of him. 
You know how servants are: without a master 
they have no will to labor, or excel. 
For Zeus who views the wide world takes away 
half the manhood of a man, that day 
he goes into captivity and slavery.” 
Eumaios crossed the court and went straight forward 
into the mégaron among the suitors; 
but death and darkness in that instant closed 
the eyes of Argos, who had seen his master, 
Odysseus, after twenty years. 
Long before anyone else 
Telémakhos caught sight of the grey woodsman 
coming from the door, and called him over 
with a quick jerk of his head. Eumaios’ 
narrowed eyes made out an empty bench 
beside the one the carver used—that servant 
who had no respite, carving for the suitors. 
This bench he took possession of, and placed it 
across the table from Telémakhos 
for his own use. Then the two men were served 
cuts from a roast and bread from a bread basket. 
At no long interval, Odysseus came 
through his own doorway as a mendicant, 
humped like a bundle of rags over his stick. 
He settled on the inner ash wood sill, 
leaning against the door jamb—cypress timber 
the skilled carpenter planed years ago 
and set up with a plumbline. 
Now Telémakhos 
took an entire loaf and a double handful 
of roast meat; then he said to the forester: 
“Give these to the stranger there. But tell him 
to go among the suitors, on his own; 
he may beg all he wants. This hanging back 
is no asset to a hungry man.” 
The swineherd rose at once, crossed to the door, 
and halted by Odysseus. 
“Friend,” he said, 
“Telémakhos is pleased to give you these, 
but he commands you to approach the suitors; 
you may ask all you want from them. He adds, 
your shyness is no asset to a beggar.” 
The great tactician, lifting up his eyes, 
cried: 
“Zeus aloft! A blessing on Telémakhos! 
Let all things come to pass as he desires!” 
Palms held out, in the beggar’s gesture, he 
received the bread and meat and put it down 
before him on his knapsack—lowly table!— 
then he fell to, devouring it. Meanwhile 
the harper in the great room sang a song. 
Not till the man was fed did the sweet harper 
end his singing—whereupon the company 
made the walls ring again with talk. 
Unseen, 
Athena took her place beside Odysseus 
whispering in his ear: 
“Yes, try the suitors. 
You may collect a few more loaves, and learn 
who are the decent lads, and who are vicious— 
although not one can be excused from death!” 
So he appealed to them, one after another, 
going from left to right, with open palm, 
as though his life time had been spent in beggary. 
And they gave bread, for pity—wondering, though, 
at the strange man. Who could this beggar be, 
where did he come from? each would ask his neighbor; 
till in their midst the goatherd, Melanthios, 
raised his voice: 
“Hear just a word from me, 
my lords who court our illustrious queen! 
This man, 
this foreigner, I saw him on the road; 
the swineherd here was leading him this way; 
who, what, or whence he claims to be, I could not 
say for sure.” 
At this, Antinos 
turned on the swineherd brutally, saying: 
“You famous 
breeder of pigs, why bring this fellow here? 
Are we not plagued enough with beggars, 
foragers and such rats? 
You find the company 
too slow at eating up your lord’s estate— 
is that it? So you call this scarecrow in?” 
The forester replied: 
“Antinos, 
well born you are, but that was not well said. 
Who would call in a foreigner?—unless 
an artisan with skill to serve the realm, 
a healer, or a prophet, or a builder, 
or one whose harp and song might give us joy. 
All these are sought for on the endless earth, 
but when have beggars come by invitation? 
Who puts a field mouse in his granary? My lord, 
you are a hard man, and you always were, 
more so than others of this company—hard 
on all Odysseus’ people and on me. 
But this I can forget 
as long as Penelope lives on, the wise and tender 
mistress of this hall; as long 
as Prince Telémakhos—” 
But he broke off 
at a look from Telémakhos, who said: 
“Be still. 
Spare me a long-drawn answer to this gentleman. 
With his unpleasantness, he will forever make 
strife where he can—and goad the others on.” 
He turned and spoke out clearly to Antínoös: 
“What fatherly concern you show me! Frighten 
this unknown fellow, would you, from my hall 
with words that promise blows—may God forbid it! 
Give him a loaf. Am I a niggard? No, 
I call on you to give. And spare your qualms 
as to my mother’s loss, or anyone’s— 
not that in truth you have such care at heart: 
your heart is all in feeding, not in giving.” 
Antínoös replied: 
“What high and mighty 
talk, Telémakhos! No holding you! 
If every suitor gave what I may give him, 
he could be kept for months—kept out of sight!” 
He reached under the table for the footstool 
his shining feet had rested on—and this 
he held up so that all could see his gift. 
But all the rest gave alms, 
enough to fill the beggar’s pack with bread 
and roast meat. 
So it looked as though Odysseus 
had had his taste of what these men were like 
and could return scot free to his own doorway— 
but halting now before Antinods 
he made a little speech to him. Said he: 
“Give a mite, friend. I would not say, myself, 
you are the worst man of the young Akhaians. 
The noblest, rather; kingly, by your look; 
therefore you'll give more bread than others do. 
Let me speak well of you as I pass on 
over the boundless earth! 
I, too, you know, 
had fortune once, lived well, stood well with men, 
and gave alms, often, to poor wanderers 
like this one that you see—aye, to all sorts, 
no matter in what dire want. I owned 
servants—many, god knows—and all the rest 
that goes with being prosperous, as they say. 
But Zeus the son of Kronos brought me down. 
No telling 
why he would have it, but he made me go 
to Egypt with a company of rovers— 
a long sail to the south—for my undoing. 
Up the broad Nile and in to the river bank 
I brought my dipping squadron. There, indeed, 
I told the men to stand guard at the ships; 
I sent patrols out—out to rising ground; 
but reckless greed carried my crews away 
to plunder the Egyptian farms; they bore off 
wives and children, killed what men they found. 
The news ran on the wind to the city, a night cry, 
and sunrise brought both infantry and horsemen, 
filling the river plain with dazzle of bronze; 
then Zeus lord of lightning 
threw my men into a blind panic; no one dared 
stand against that host closing around us. 
Their scything weapons left our dead in piles, 
but some they took alive, into forced labor, 
myself among them. And they gave me, then, 
to one Dmetor, a traveller, son of Iasos, 
who ruled at Kypros. He conveyed me there. 
From that place, working northward, miserably—” 
But here Antinods broke in, shouting: 
“God! 
What evil wind blew in this pest? 
Get over, 
stand in the passage! Nudge my table, will you? 
Egyptian whips are sweet 
to what you’ll come to here, you nosing rat, 
making your pitch to everyone! 
These men have bread to throw away on you 
because it is not theirs. Who cares? Who spares 
another’s food, when he has more than plenty?” 
With guile Odysseus drew away, then said: 
“A pity that you have more looks than heart. 
You’d grudge a pinch of salt from your own larder 
to your own handy man. You sit here, fat 
on others’ meat, and cannot bring yourself 
to rummage out a crust of bread for me!” 
Then anger made Antinoés’ heart beat hard, 
and, glowering under his brows, he answered: 
“Now! 
You think you'll shuffle off and get away 
after that impudence? Oh, no you don’t!” 
The stool he let fly hit the man’s right shoulder 
on the packed muscle under the shoulder blade— 
like solid rock, for all the effect one saw. 
Odysseus only shook his head, containing 
thoughts of bloody work, as he walked on, 
then sat, and dropped his loaded bag again 
upon the door sill. Facing the whole crowd 
he said, and eyed them all: 
“One word only, 
my lords, and suitors of the famous queen. 
One thing I have to say. 
There is no pain, no burden for the heart 
when blows come to a man, and he defending 
his own cattle—his own cows and lambs. 
Here it was otherwise. Antinods 
hit me for being driven on by hunger— 
how many bitter seas men cross for hunger! 
If beggars interest the gods, if there are Furies 
pent in the dark to avenge a poor man’s wrong, then may 
Antinoos meet his death before his wedding day!” 
Then said Eupeithes’ son, Antinos: 
“Enough. 
Eat and be quiet where you are, or shamble elsewhere, 
unless you want these lads to stop your mouth 
pulling you by the heels, or hands and feet, 
over the whole floor, till your back is peeled!” 
But now the rest were mortified, and someone 
spoke from the crowd of young bucks to rebuke him: 
“A poor show, that—hitting this famished tramp— 
bad business, if he happened to be a god. 
You know they go in foreign guise, the gods do, 
looking like strangers, turning up 
in towns and settlements to keep an eye 
on manners, good or bad.” 
But at this notion 
Antínoös only shrugged. 
Telémakhos, 
after the blow his father bore, sat still 
without a tear, though his heart felt the blow. 
Slowly he shook his head from side to side, 
containing murderous thoughts. 
Penelope 
on the higher level of her room had heard 
the blow, and knew who gave it. Now she murmured: 
“Would god you could be hit yourself, Antinods— 
hit by Apollo’s bowshot!” 
And Eurynome 
her housekeeper, put in: 
“He and no other? 
If all we pray for came to pass, not one 
would live till dawn!” 
Her gentle mistress said: 
“Oh, Nan, they are a bad lot; they intend 
ruin for all of us; but Antinods 
appears a blacker-hearted hound than any. 
Here is a poor man come, a wanderer, 
driven by want to beg his bread, and everyone 
in hall gave bits, to cram his bag—only 
Antinos threw a stool, and banged his shoulder!” 
So she described it, sitting in her chamber 
among her maids—while her true lord was eating. 
Then she called in the forester and said: 
“Go to that man on my behalf, Eumaios, 
and send him here, so I can greet and question him. 
Abroad in the great world, he may have heard 
rumors about Odysseus—may have known him!” 
Then you replied—O swineherd! 
“Ah, my queen, 
if these Akhaian sprigs would hush their babble 
the man could tell you tales to charm your heart. 
Three days and nights I kept him in my hut; 
he came straight off a ship, you know, to me. 
There was no end to what he made me hear 
of his hard roving and I listened, eyes 
upon him, as a man drinks in a tale 
a minstrel sings—a minstrel taught by heaven 
to touch the hearts of men. At such a song 
the listener becomes rapt and still. Just so 
I found myself enchanted by this man. 
He claims an old tie with Odysseus, too— 
in his home country the Minoan land 
of Krete. From Krete he came, a rolling stone 
washed by the gales of life this way and that 
to our own beach. 
If he can be believed 
he has news of Odysseus near at hand 
alive, in the rich country of Thesprotia, 
bringing a mass of treasure home.” 
Then wise Penelope said again: 
“Go call him, let him come here, let him tell 
that tale again for my own ears. 
Our friends 
can drink their cups outside or stay in hall, 
being so carefree. And why not? Their stores 
lie intact in their homes, both food and drink, 
with only servants left to take a little. 
But these men spend their days around our house 
killing our beeves, our fat goats and our sheep, 
carousing, drinking up our good dark wine; 
sparing nothing, squandering everything. 
No champion like Odysseus takes our part. 
Ah, if he comes again, no falcon ever 
struck more suddenly than he will, with his son, 
to avenge this outrage!” 
The great hall below 
at this point rang with a tremendous sneeze— 
“kchaou!” from Telémakhos—like an acclamation. 
And laughter seized Penelope. 
Then quickly, 
lucidly she went on: 
“Go call the stranger 
straight to me. Did you hear that, Eumaios? 
My son’s thundering sneeze at what I said! 
May death come of a sudden so; may death 
relieve us, clean as that, of all the suitors! 
Let me add one thing—do not overlook it— 
if I can see this man has told the truth, 
I promise him a warm new cloak and tunic.” 
With all this in his head, the forester 
went down the hall, and halted near the beggar, 
saying aloud: 
“Good father, you are called 
by the wise mother of Telémakhos, 
Penelope. The queen, despite her troubles, 
is moved by a desire to hear your tales 
about her lord—and if she finds them true, 
she’ll see you clothed in what you need, a cloak 
and a fresh tunic. 
You may have your belly 
full each day you go about this realm 
begging. For all may give, and all they wish.” 
Now said Odysseus, the old soldier: 
“Friend, 
I wish this instant I could tell my facts 
to the wise daughter of Ikarios, Penélopé— 
and I have much to tell about her husband; 
we went through much together. 
But just now 
this hard crowd worries me. They are, you said 
infamous to the very rim of heaven 
for violent acts: and here, just now, this fellow 
gave me a bruise. What had I done to him? 
But who would lift a hand for me? Telémakhos? 
Anyone else? 
No; bid the queen be patient. 
Let her remain till sundown in her room, 
and then—if she will seat me near the fire— 
inquire tonight about her lord’s return. 
My rags are sorry cover; you know that; 
I showed my sad condition first to you.” 
The woodsman heard him out, and then returned; 
but the queen met him on her threshold, crying: 
“Have you not brought him? Why? What is he thinking? 
Has he some fear of overstepping? Shy 
about these inner rooms? A hangdog beggar?” 
To this you answered, friend Eumaios: 
“No: 
he reasons as another might, and well, 
not to tempt any swordplay from these drunkards. 
Be patient, wait—he says—till darkness falls. 
And, O my queen, for you too that is better: 
better to be alone with him, and question him, 
and hear him out.” 
Penelope replied: 
“He is no fool; he sees how it could be. 
Never were mortal men like these 
for bullying and brainless arrogance!” 
Thus she accepted what had been proposed, 
so he went back into the crowd. He joined 
Telémakhos, and said at once in whispers— 
his head bent, so that no one else might hear: 
“Dear prince, I must go home to keep good watch 
on hut and swine, and look to my own affairs. 
Everything here is in your hands. Consider 
your own safety before the rest; take care 
not to get hurt. Many are dangerous here. 
May Zeus destroy them first, before we suffer!” 
Telémakhos said: 
“Your wish is mine, Uncle. 
Go when your meal is finished. Then come back 
at dawn, and bring good victims for a slaughter. 
Everything here is in my hands indeed— 
and in the disposition of the gods.” 
Taking his seat on the smooth bench again, 
Eumaios ate and drank his fill, then rose 
to climb the mountain trail back to his swine, 
leaving the mégaron and court behind him 
crowded with banqueters. 
These had their joy 
of dance and song, as day waned into evening. 


BOOK 18

Now a true scavenger came in—a public tramp 
who begged around the town of Ithaka, 
a by-word for his insatiable swag-belly, 
feeding and drinking, dawn to dark. No pith 
was in him, and no nerve, huge as he looked. 
Arnaios, as his gentle mother called him, 
he had been nicknamed “Iros” by the young 
for being ready to take messages. 
This fellow 
thought he would rout Odysseus from his doorway, 
growling at him: 
“Clear out, grandfather, 
or else be hauled out by the ankle bone. 
See them all giving me the wink? That means, 
‘Go on and drag him out!’ I hate to do it. 
Up with you! Or would you like a fist fight?” 
Odysseus only frowned and looked him over, 
taking account of everything, then said: 
“Master, I am no trouble to you here. 
I offer no remarks. I grudge you nothing. 
Take all you get, and welcome. Here is room 
for two on this doorslab—or do you own it? 
You are a tramp, I think, like me. Patience: 
a windfall from the gods will come. But drop 
that talk of using fists; it could annoy me. 
Old as I am, I might just crack a rib 
or split a lip for you. My life would go 
even more peacefully, after tomorrow, 
looking for no more visits here from you.” 
Iros the tramp grew red and hooted: 
“Ho, 
listen to him! The swine can talk your arm off, 
like an old oven woman! With two punches 
Pd knock him snoring, if I had a mind to— 
and not a tooth left in his head, the same 
as an old sow caught in the corn! Belt up! 
And let this company see the way I do it 
when we square off. Can you fight a fresher man?” 
Under the lofty doorway, on the door sill 
of wide smooth ash, they held this rough exchange. 
And the tall full-blooded suitor, Antinos, 
overhearing, broke into happy laughter. 
Then he said to the others: 
“Oh, my friends, 
no luck like this ever turned up before! 
What a farce heaven has brought this house! 
The stranger 
and Iros have had words, they brag of boxing! 
Into the ring they go, and no more talk!” 
All the young men got on their feet now, laughing, 
to crowd around the ragged pair. Antinods 
called out: 
“Gentlemen, quiet! One more thing: 
here are goat stomachs ready on the fire 
to stuff with blood and fat, good supper pudding. 
The man who wins this gallant bout 
may step up here and take the one he likes. 
And let him feast with us from this day on: 
no other beggar will be admitted here 
when we are at our wine.” 
This pleased them all. 
But now that wily man, Odysseus, muttered: 
“An old man, an old hulk, has no business 
fighting a young man, but my belly nags me; 
nothing will do but I must take a beating. 
Well, then, let every man here swear an oath 
not to step in for Iros. No one throw 
a punch for luck. I could be whipped that way.” 
So much the suitors were content to swear, 
but after they reeled off their oaths, Telémakhos 
put in a word to clinch it, saying: 
“Friend, 
if you will stand and fight, as pride requires, 
don’t worry about a foul blow from behind. 
Whoever hits you will take on the crowd. 
You have my word as host; you have the word 
of these two kings, Antinods and Eurymakhos— 
a pair of thinking men.” 
All shouted, “Aye!” 
So now Odysseus made his shirt a belt 
and roped his rags around his loins, baring 
his hurdler’s thighs and boxer’s breadth of shoulder, 
the dense rib-sheath and upper arms. Athena 
stood nearby to give him bulk and power, 
while the young suitors watched with narrowed eyes— 
and comments went around: 
“By god, old Iros now retiros.” 
“Aye, 
he asked for it, he’ll get it—bloody, too.” 
“The build this fellow had, under his rags!” 
Panic made Iros’ heart jump, but the yard-boys 
hustled and got him belted by main force, 
though all his blubber quivered now with dread. 
Antinoés’ angry voice rang in his ears: 
“You sack of guts, you might as well be dead, 
might as well never have seen the light of day, 
if this man makes you tremble! Chicken-heart, 
afraid of an old wreck, far gone in misery! 
Well, here is what I say—and what Ill do. 
If this ragpicker can outfight you, whip you, 
I'll ship you out to that king in Epeiros, 
Ekhetos—he skins everyone alive. 
Let him just cut your nose off and your ears 
and pull your privy parts out by the roots 
to feed raw to his hunting dogs!” 
Poor Iros 
felt a new fit of shaking take his knees. 
But the yard-boys pushed him out. Now both contenders 
put their hands up. Royal Odysseus 
pondered if he should hit him with all he had 
and drop the man dead on the spot, or only 
spar, with force enough to knock him down. 
Better that way, he thought—a gentle blow, 
else he might give himself away. 
The two 
were at close quarters now, and Iros lunged 
hitting the shoulder. Then Odysseus hooked him 
under the ear and shattered his jaw bone, 
so bright red blood came bubbling from his mouth, 
as down he pitched into the dust, bleating, 
kicking against the ground, his teeth stove in. 
The suitors whooped and swung their arms, half dead 
with pangs of laughter. 
Then, by the ankle bone, 
Odysseus hauled the fallen one outside, 
crossing the courtyard to the gate, and piled him 
against the wall. In his right hand he stuck 
his begging staff, and said: 
“Here, take your post. 
Sit here to keep the dogs and pigs away. 
You can give up your habit of command 
over poor waifs and beggarmen—you swab. 
Another time you may not know what hit you.” 
When he had slung his rucksack by the string 
over his shoulder, like a wad of rags, 
he sat down on the broad door sill again, 
as laughing suitors came to flock inside; 
and each young buck in passing gave him greeting, 
saying, maybe, 
“Zeus fill your pouch for this! 
May the gods grant your heart’s desire!” 
“Well done 
to put that walking famine out of business.” 
“We'll ship him out to that king in Epeiros, 
Ekhetos—he skins everyone alive.” 
Odysseus found grim cheer in their good wishes— 
his work had started well. 
Now from the fire 
his fat blood pudding came, deposited 
before him by Antinods—then, to boot, 
two brown loaves from the basket, and some wine 
in a fine cup of gold. These gifts Amphinomos 
gave him. Then he said: 
“Here’s luck, grandfather; 
a new day; may the worst be over now.” 
Odysseus answered, and his mind ranged far: 
“Amphinomos, your head is clear, I’d say; 
so was your father’s—or at least I’ve heard 
good things of Nisos the Doulikhion, 
whose son you are, they tell me—an easy man. 
And you seem gently bred. 
In view of that, 
I have a word to say to you, so listen. 
Of mortal creatures, all that breathe and move, 
earth bears none frailer than mankind. What man 
believes in woe to come, so long as valor 
and tough knees are supplied him by the gods? 
But when the gods in bliss bring miseries on, 
then willy-nilly, blindly, he endures. 
Our minds are as the days are, dark or bright, 
blown over by the father of gods and men. 
So I, too, in my time thought to be happy; 
but far and rash I ventured, counting on 
my own right arm, my father, and my kin; 
behold me now. 
No man should flout the law, 
but keep in peace what gifts the gods may give. 
I see you young blades living dangerously, 
a household eaten up, a wife dishonored— 
and yet the master will return, I tell you, 
to his own place, and soon; for he is near. 
So may some power take you out of this, 
homeward, and softly, not to face that man 
the hour he sets foot on his native ground. 
Between him and the suitors I foretell 
no quittance, no way out, unless by blood, 
once he shall stand beneath his own roof-beam.” 
Gravely, when he had done, he made libation 
and took a sip of honey-hearted wine, 
giving the cup, then, back into the hands 
of the young nobleman. Amphinomos, for his part, 
shaking his head, with chill and burdened breast, 
turned in the great hall. 
Now his heart foreknew 
the wrath to come, but he could not take flight, 
being by Athena bound there. 
Death would have him 
broken by a spear thrown by Telémakhos. 
So he sat down where he had sat before. 
And now heart-prompting from the grey-eyed goddess 
came to the quiet queen, Penélopé: 
a wish to show herself before the suitors; 
for thus by fanning their desire again 
Athena meant to set her beauty high 
before her husband’s eyes, before her son. 
Knowing no reason, laughing confusedly, 
she said: 
“Eurynomé, I have a craving 
I never had at all—I would be seen 
among those ruffians, hateful as they are. 
I might well say a word, then, to my son, 
for his own good—tell him to shun that crowd; 
for all their gay talk, they are bent on evil.” 
Mistress Eurynome replied: 
“Well said, child, 
now is the time. Go down, and make it clear, 
hold nothing back from him. 
But you must bathe 
and put a shine upon your cheeks—not this way, 
streaked under your eyes and stained with tears. 
You make it worse, being forever sad, 
and now your boy’s a bearded man! Remember 
you prayed the gods to let you see him so.” 
Penelope replied: 
“Eurynomé, 
it is a kind thought, but I will not hear it— 
to bathe and sleek with perfumed oil. No, no, 
the gods forever took my sheen away 
when my lord sailed for Troy in the decked ships. 
Only tell my Autonoé to come, 
and Hippodameia; they should be attending me 
in hall, if I appear there. I could not 
enter alone into that crowd of men.” 
At this the good old woman left the chamber 
to tell the maids her bidding. But now too 
the grey-eyed goddess had her own designs. 
Upon the quiet daughter of Ikarios 
she let clear drops of slumber fall, until 
the queen lay back asleep, her limbs unstrung, 
in her long chair. And while she slept the goddess 
endowed her with immortal grace to hold 
the eyes of the Akhaians. With ambrosia 
she bathed her cheeks and throat and smoothed her brow— 
ambrosia, used by flower-crowned Kythereia 
when she would join the rose-lipped Graces dancing. 
Grandeur she gave her, too, in height and form, 
and made her whiter than carved ivory. 
Touching her so, the perfect one was gone. 
Now came the maids, bare-armed and lovely, voices 
breaking into the room. The queen awoke 
and as she rubbed her cheek she sighed: 
“Ah, soft 
that drowse I lay embraced in, pain forgot! 
If only Artemis the Pure would give me 
death as mild, and soon! No heart-ache more, 
no wearing out my lifetime with desire 
and sorrow, mindful of my lord, good man 
in all ways that he was, best of the Akhaians!” 
She rose and left her glowing upper room, 
and down the stairs, with her two maids in train, 
this beautiful lady went before the suitors. 
Then by a pillar of the solid roof 
she paused, her shining veil across her cheek, 
the two girls close to her and still; 
and in that instant weakness took those men 
in the knee joints, their hearts grew faint with lust; 
not one but swore to god to lie beside her. 
But speaking for her dear son’s ears alone 
she said: 
“Telémakhos, what has come over you? 
Lightminded you were not, in all your boyhood. 
Now you are full grown, come of age; a man 
from foreign parts might take you for the son 
of royalty, to go by your good looks; 
and have you no more thoughtfulness or manners? 
How could it happen in our hall that you 
permit the stranger to be so abused? 
Here, in our house, a guest, can any man 
suffer indignity, come by such injury? 
What can this be for you but public shame?” 
Telémakhos looked in her eyes and answered, 
with his clear head and his discretion: 
“Mother, 
I cannot take it ill that you are angry. 
I know the meaning of these actions now, 
both good and bad. I had been young and blind. 
How can I always keep to what is fair 
while these sit here to put fear in me?—princes 
from near and far whose interest is my ruin; 
are any on my side? 
But you should know 
the suitors did not have their way, matching 
the stranger here and Iros—for the stranger 
beat him to the ground. 
O Father Zeus! 
Athena and Apollo! could I see 
the suitors whipped like that! Courtyard and hall 
strewn with our friends, too weak-kneed to get up, 
chapfallen to their collarbones, the way 
old Iros rolls his head there by the gate 
as though he were pig-drunk! No energy 
to stagger on his homeward path; no fight 
left in his numb legs!” 
Thus Penelope 
reproached her son, and he replied. Now, interrupting, 
Eurymakhos called out to her: 
“Penelope, 
deep-minded queen, daughter of Ikarios, 
if all Akhaians in the land of Argos 
only saw you now! What hundreds more 
would join your suitors here to feast tomorrow! 
Beauty like yours no woman had before, 
or majesty, or mastery.” 
She answered: 
“Eurymakhos, my qualities—I know— 
my face, my figure, all were lost or blighted 
when the Akhaians crossed the sea to Troy, 
Odysseus my lord among the rest. 
If he returned, if he were here to care for me, 
I might be happily renowned! 
But grief instead heaven sent me—years of pain. 
Can I forget?—the day he left this island, 
enfolding my right hand and wrist in his, 
he said: 
‘My lady, the Akhaian troops 
will not easily make it home again 
full strength, unhurt, from Troy. They say the Trojans 
are fighters too; good lances and good bowmen, 
horsemen, charioteers—and those can be 
decisive when a battle hangs in doubt. 
So whether God will send me back, or whether 
I'll be a captive there, I cannot tell. 
Here, then, you must attend to everything. 
My parents in our house will be a care for you 
as they are now, or more, while I am gone. 
Wait for the beard to darken our boy’s cheek; 
then marry whom you will, and move away.’ 
The years he spoke of are now past; the night 
comes when a bitter marriage overtakes me, 
desolate as I am, deprived by Zeus 
of all the sweets of life. 
How galling, too, 
to see newfangled manners in my suitors! 
Others who go to court a gentlewoman, 
daughter of a rich house, if they are rivals, 
bring their own beeves and sheep along; her friends 
ought to be feasted, gifts are due to her; 
would any dare to live at her expense?” 
Odysseus’ heart laughed when he heard all this— 
her sweet tones charming gifts out of the suitors 
with talk of marriage, though she intended none. 
Eupeithés’ son, Antinods, now addressed her: 
“Tkarios’ daughter, O deep-minded queen! 
If someone cares to make you gifts, accept them! 
It is no courtesy to turn gifts away. 
But we go neither to our homes nor elsewhere 
until of all Akhaians here you take 
the best man for your lord.” 
Pleased at this answer, 
every man sent a squire to fetch a gift— 
Antinos, a wide resplendent robe, 
embroidered fine, and fastened with twelve brooches, 
pins pressed into sheathing tubes of gold; 
Eurymakhos, a necklace, wrought in gold, 
with sunray pieces of clear glinting amber. 
Eurydamas’s men came back with pendants, 
ear-drops in triple clusters of warm lights; 
and from the hoard of Lord Polyktor’s son, 
Peisandros, came a band for her white throat, 
jewelled adornment. Other wondrous things 
were brought as gifts from the Akhaian princes. 
Penelope then mounted the stair again, 
her maids behind, with treasure in their arms. 
And now the suitors gave themselves to dancing, 
to harp and haunting song, as night drew on; 
black night indeed came on them at their pleasure. 
But three torch fires were placed in the long hall 
to give them light. On hand were stores of fuel, 
dry seasoned chips of resinous wood, split up 
by the bronze hatchet blade—these were mixed in 
among the flames to keep them flaring bright; 
each housemaid of Odysseus took her turn. 
Now he himself, the shrewd and kingly man, 
approached and told them: 
“Housemaids of Odysseus, 
your master so long absent in the world, 
go to the women’s chambers, to your queen. 
Attend her, make the distaff whirl, divert her, 
stay in her room, comb wool for her. 
I stand here 
ready to tend these flares and offer light 
to everyone. They cannot tire me out, 
even if they wish to drink till Dawn. 
I am a patient man.” 
But the women giggled, 
glancing back and forth—laughed in his face; 
and one smooth girl, Melantho, spoke to him 
most impudently. She was Dolios’ daughter, 
taken as ward in childhood by Penelope 
who gave her playthings to her heart’s content 
and raised her as her own. Yet the girl felt 
nothing for her mistress, no compunction, 
but slept and made love with Eurymakhos. 
Her bold voice rang now in Odysseus’ ears: 
“You must be crazy, punch drunk, you old goat. 
Instead of going out to find a smithy 
to sleep warm in—or a tavern bench—you stay 
putting your oar in, amid all our men. 
Numbskull, not to be scared! The wine you drank 
has clogged your brain, or are you always this way, 
boasting like a fool? Or have you lost 
your mind because you beat that tramp, that Iros? 
Look out, or someone better may get up 
and give you a good knocking about the ears 
to send you out all bloody.” 
But Odysseus 
glared at her under his brows and said: 
“One minute: 
let me tell Telémakhos how you talk 
in hall, you slut; he’ll cut your arms and legs off!” 
This hard shot took the women’s breath away 
and drove them quaking to their rooms, as though 
knives were behind: they felt he spoke the truth. 
So there he stood and kept the firelight high 
and looked the suitors over, while his mind 
roamed far ahead to what must be accomplished. 
They, for their part, could not now be still 
or drop their mockery—for Athena wished 
Odysseus mortified still more. 
Eurymakhos, 
the son of Pélybos, took up the baiting, 
angling for a laugh among his friends. 
“Suitors of our distinguished queen,” he said, 
“hear what my heart would have me say. 
This man 
comes with a certain aura of divinity 
into Odysseus’ hall. He shines. 
He shines 
around the noggin, like a flashing light, 
having no hair at all to dim his lustre.” 
Then turning to Odysseus, raider of cities, 
he went on: 
“Friend, you have a mind to work, 
do you? Could I hire you to clear stones 
from wasteland for me—you'll be paid enough— 
collecting boundary walls and planting trees? 
Pd give you a bread ration every day, 
a cloak to wrap in, sandals for your feet. 
Oh no: you learned your dodges long ago— 
no honest sweat. You’d rather tramp the country 
begging, to keep your hoggish belly full.” 
The master of many crafts replied: 
“Eurymakhos, 
we two might try our hands against each other 
in early summer when the days are long, 
in meadow grass, with one good scythe for me 
and one as good for you: we’d cut our way 
down a deep hayfield, fasting to late evening. 
Or we could try our hands behind a plow, 
driving the best of oxen—fat, well-fed, 
well-matched for age and pulling power, and say 
four strips apiece of loam the share could break: 
you’d see then if I cleft you a straight furrow. 
Competition in arms? If Zeus Kronion 
roused up a scuffle now, give me a shield, 
two spears, a dogskin cap with plates of bronze 
to fit my temples, and you’d see me go 
where the first rank of fighters lock in battle. 
There would be no more jeers about my belly. 
You thick-skinned menace to all courtesy! 
You think you are a great man and a champion, 
but up against few men, poor stuff, at that. 
Just let Odysseus return, those doors 
wide open as they are, you’d find too narrow 
to suit you on your sudden journey out.” 
Now fury mounted in Eurymakhos, 
who scowled and shot back: 
“Bundle of rags and lice! 
By god, Pll make you suffer for your gall, 
your insolent gabble before all our men.” 
He had his foot-stool out: but now Odysseus 
took to his haunches by Amphinomos’ knees, 
fearing Eurymakhos’ missile, as it flew. 
It clipped a wine steward on the serving hand, 
so that his pitcher dropped with a loud clang 
while he fell backward, cursing, in the dust. 
In the shadowy hall a low sound rose—of suitors 
murmuring to one another. 
“Ai!” they said, 
“This vagabond would have done well to perish 
somewhere else, and make us no such rumpus. 
Here we are, quarreling over tramps; good meat 
and wine forgotten; good sense gone by the board.” 
Telémakhos, his young heart high, put in: 
“Bright souls, alight with wine, you can no longer 
hide the cups you’ve taken. Aye, some god 
is goading you. Why not go home to bed?— 
I mean when you are moved to. No one jumps 
at my command.” 
Struck by his blithe manner, 
the young men’s teeth grew fixed in their under lips, 
but now the son of Nisos, Lord Amphinomos 
of Aretiadés, addressed them all: 
“O friends, no ruffling replies are called for; 
that was fair counsel. 
Hands off the stranger, now, 
and hands off any other servant here 
in the great house of King Odysseus. Come, 
let my own herald wet our cups once more, 
we'll make an offering, and then to bed. 
The stranger can be left behind in hall; 
Telémakhos may care for him; he came 
to Telémakhos’ door, not ours.” 
This won them over. 
The soldier Moulios, Doulikhion herald, 
comrade in arms of Lord Amphinomos, 
mixed the wine and served them all. They tipped out 
drops for the blissful gods, and drank the rest, 
and when they had drunk their thirst away 
they trailed off homeward drowsily to bed. 


BOOK 19

Now by Athena’s side in the quiet hall 
studying the ground for slaughter, Lord Odysseus 
turned to Telémakhos. 
“The arms,” he said. 
“Harness and weapons must be out of sight 
in the inner room. And if the suitors miss them, 
be mild; just say ‘I had a mind to move them 
out of the smoke. They seemed no longer 
the bright arms that Odysseus left at home 
when he went off to Troy. Here where the fire’s 
hot breath came, they had grown black and drear. 
One better reason struck me, too: 
suppose a brawl starts up when you’ve been drinking— 
you might in madness let each other’s blood, 
and that would stain your feast, your courtship. 
Iron 
itself can draw men’s hands.” 
Then he fell silent, 
and Telémakhos obeyed his father’s word. 
He called Eurykleia, the nurse, and told her: 
“Nurse, go shut the women in their quarters 
while I shift Father’s armor back 
to the inner rooms—these beautiful arms unburnished, 
caked with black soot in his years abroad. 
I was a child then. Well, I am not now. 
I want them shielded from the draught and smoke.” 
And the old woman answered: 
“It is time, child, 
you took an interest in such things. I wish 
you’d put your mind on all your house and chattels. 
But who will go along to hold a light? 
You said no maids, no torch-bearers.” 
Telémakhos 
looked at her and replied: 
“Our friend here. 
A man who shares my meat can bear a hand, 
no matter how far he is from home.” 
He spoke so soldierly 
her own speech halted on her tongue. Straight back 
she went to lock the doors of the women’s hall. 
And now the two men sprang to work—father 
and princely son, loaded with round helms 
and studded bucklers, lifting the long spears, 
while in their path Pallas Athena 
held up a golden lamp of purest light. 
Telémakhos at last burst out: 
“Oh, Father, 
here is a marvel! All around I see 
the walls and roof beams, pedestals and pillars, 
lighted as though by white fire blazing near. 
One of the gods of heaven is in this place!” 
Then said Odysseus, the great tactician, 
“Be still: keep still about it: just remember it. 
The gods who rule Olympos make this light. 
You may go off to bed now. Here I stay 
to test your mother and her maids again. 
Out of her long grief she will question me.” 
Telémakhos went across the hall and out 
under the light of torches—crossed the court 
to the tower chamber where he had always slept. 
Here now again he lay, waiting for dawn, 
while in the great hall by Athena’s side 
Odysseus waited with his mind on slaughter. 
Presently Penélopé from her chamber 
stepped in her thoughtful beauty. 
So might Artemis 
or golden Aphrodite have descended; 
and maids drew to the hearth her own smooth chair 
inlaid with silver whorls and ivory. The artisan 
Ikmalios had made it, long before, 
with a footrest in a single piece, and soft 
upon the seat a heavy fleece was thrown. 
Here by the fire the queen sat down. Her maids, 
leaving their quarters, came with white arms bare 
to clear the wine cups and the bread, and move 
the trestle boards where men had lingered drinking. 
Fiery ashes out of the pine-chip flares 
they tossed, and piled on fuel for light and heat. 
And now a second time Melantho’s voice 
rang brazen in Odysseus’ ears: 
“Ah, stranger, 
are you still here, so creepy, late at night 
hanging about, looking the women over? 
You old goat, go outside, cuddle your supper; 
get out, or a torch may kindle you behind!” 
At this Odysseus glared under his brows 
and said: 
“Little devil, why pitch into me again? 
Because I go unwashed and wear these rags, 
and make the rounds? But so I must, being needy; 
that is the way a vagabond must live. 
And do not overlook this: in my time 
I too had luck, lived well, stood well with men, 
and gave alms, often, to poor wanderers 
like him you see before you—aye, to all sorts, 
no matter in what dire want. I owned 
servants—many, I say—and all the rest 
that goes with what men call prosperity. 
But Zeus the son of Kronos brought me down. 
Mistress, mend your ways, or you may lose 
all this vivacity of yours. What if her ladyship 
were stirred to anger? What if Odysseus came?— 
and I can tell you, there is hope of that— 
or if the man is done for, still his son 
lives to be reckoned with, by Apollo’s will. 
None of you can go wantoning on the sly 
and fool him now. He is too old for that.” 
Penelope, being near enough to hear him, 
spoke out sharply to her maid: 
“Oh, shameless, 
through and through! And do you think me blind, 
blind to your conquest? It will cost your life. 
You knew I waited—for you heard me say it— 
waited to see this man in hall and question him 
about my lord; I am so hard beset.” 
She turned away and said to the housekeeper: 
“Eurynomé, a bench, a spread of sheepskin, 
to put my guest at ease. Now he shall talk 
and listen, and be questioned.” 
Willing hands 
brought a smooth bench, and dropped a fleece upon it. 
Here the adventurer and king sat down; 
then carefully Penélopé began: 
“Friend, let me ask you first of all: 
who are you, where do you come from, of what nation 
and parents were you born?” 
And he replied: 
“My lady, never a man in the wide world 
should have a fault to find with you. Your name 
has gone out under heaven like the sweet 
honor of some god-fearing king, who rules 
in equity over the strong: his black lands bear 
both wheat and barley, fruit trees laden bright, 
new lambs at lambing time—and the deep sea 
gives great hauls of fish by his good strategy, 
so that his folk fare well. 
O my dear lady, 
this being so, let it suffice to ask me 
of other matters—not my blood, my homeland. 
Do not enforce me to recall my pain. 
My heart is sore; but I must not be found 
sitting in tears here, in another’s house: 
it is not well forever to be grieving. 
One of the maids might say—or you might think— 
I had got maudlin over cups of wine.” 
And Penelope replied: 
“Stranger, my looks, 
my face, my carriage, were soon lost or faded 
when the Akhaians crossed the sea to Troy, 
Odysseus my lord among the rest. 
If he returned, if he were here to care for me, 
I might be happily renowned! 
But grief instead heaven sent me—years of pain. 
Sons of the noblest families on the islands, 
Doulikhion, Same, wooded Zakynthos, 
with native Ithakans, are here to court me, 
against my wish; and they consume this house. 
Can I give proper heed to guest or suppliant 
or herald on the realm’s affairs? 
How could I? 
wasted with longing for Odysseus, while here 
they press for marriage. 
Ruses served my turn 
to draw the time out—first a close-grained web 
I had the happy thought to set up weaving 
on my big loom in hall. I said, that day: 
‘Young men—my suitors, now my lord is dead, 
let me finish my weaving before I marry, 
or else my thread will have been spun in vain. 
It is a shroud I weave for Lord Laértés 
when cold Death comes to lay him on his bier. 
The country wives would hold me in dishonor 
if he, with all his fortune, lay unshrouded.’ 
I reached their hearts that way, and they agreed. 
So every day I wove on the great loom, 
but every night by torchlight I unwove it; 
and so for three years I deceived the Akhaians. 
But when the seasons brought a fourth year on, 
as long months waned, and the long days were spent, 
through impudent folly in the slinking maids 
they caught me—clamored up to me at night; 
I had no choice then but to finish it. 
And now, as matters stand at last, 
I have no strength left to evade a marriage, 
cannot find any further way; my parents 
urge it upon me, and my son 
will not stand by while they eat up his property. 
He comprehends it, being a man full grown, 
able to oversee the kind of house 
Zeus would endow with honor. 
But you too 
confide in me, tell me your ancestry. 
You were not born of mythic oak or stone.” 
And the great master of invention answered: 
“O honorable wife of Lord Odysseus, 
must you go on asking about my family? 
Then I will tell you, though my pain 
be doubled by it: and whose pain would not 
if he had been away as long as I have 
and had hard roving in the world of men? 
But I will tell you even so, my lady. 
One of the great islands of the world 
in midsea, in the winedark sea, is Krete: 
spacious and rich and populous, with ninety 
cities and a mingling of tongues. 
Akhaians there are found, along with Kretan 
hillmen of the old stock, and Kydonians, 
Dorians in three blood-lines, Pelasgians— 
and one among their ninety towns is Knossos. 
Here lived King Minos whom great Zeus received 
every ninth year in private council—Minos, 
the father of my father, Deukalion. 
Two sons Deukalion had: Idomeneus, 
who went to join the Atreidai before Troy 
in the beaked ships of war; and then myself, 
Aithôn by name—a stripling next my brother. 
But I saw with my own eyes at Knossos once 
Odysseus. 
Gales had caught him off Cape Malea, 
driven him southward on the coast of Krete, 
when he was bound for Troy. At Amnisos, 
hard by the holy cave of Eileithuia, 
he lay to, and dropped anchor, in that open 
and rough roadstead riding out the blow. 
Meanwhile he came ashore, came inland, asking 
after Iddmeneus: dear friends he said they were; 
but now ten mornings had already passed, 
ten or eleven, since my brother sailed. 
So I played host and took Odysseus home, 
saw him well lodged and fed, for we had plenty; 
then I made requisitions—barley, wine, 
and beeves for sacrince—to give his company 
abundant fare along with him. 
Twelve days 
they stayed with us, the Akhaians, while that wind 
out of the north shut everyone inside— 
even on land you could not keep your feet, 
such fury was abroad. On the thirteenth, 
when the gale dropped, they put to sea.” 
Now all these lies he made appear so truthful 
she wept as she sat listening. The skin 
of her pale face grew moist the way pure snow 
softens and glistens on the mountains, thawed 
by Southwind after powdering from the West, 
and, as the snow melts, mountain streams run full: 
so her white cheeks were wetted by these tears 
shed for her lord—and he close by her side. 
Imagine how his heart ached for his lady, , 
his wife in tears; and yet he never blinked; 
his eyes might have been made of horn or iron 
for all that she could see. He had this trick— 
wept, if he willed to, inwardly. 
Well, then, 
as soon as her relieving tears were shed 
she spoke once more: 
“I think that I shall say, friend, 
give me some proof, if it is really true 
that you were host in that place to my husband 
with his brave men, as you declare. Come, tell me 
the quality of his clothing, how he looked, 
and some particular of his company.” 
Odysseus answered, and his mind ranged far: 
“Lady, so long a time now lies between, 
it is hard to speak of it. Here is the twentieth year 
since that man left the island of my father. 
But I shall tell what memory calls to mind. 
A purple cloak, and fleecy, he had on— 
a double thick one. Then, he wore a brooch 
made of pure gold with twin tubes for the prongs, 
and on the face a work of art: a hunting dog 
pinning a spotted fawn in agony 
between his forepaws—wonderful to see 
how being gold, and nothing more, he bit 
the golden deer convulsed, with wild hooves flying. 
Odysseus’ shirt I noticed, too—a fine 
closefitting tunic like dry onion skin, 
so soft it was, and shiny. 
Women there, 
many of them, would cast their eyes on it. 
But I might add, for your consideration, 
whether he brought these things from home, or whether 
a shipmate gave them to him, coming aboard, 
I have no notion: some regardful host 
in another port perhaps it was. Affection 
followed him—there were few Akhaians like him. 
And I too made him gifts: a good bronze blade, 
a cloak with lining and a broidered shirt, 
and sent him off in his trim ship with honor. 
A herald, somewhat older than himself, 
he kept beside him; Ill describe this man: 
round-shouldered, dusky, woolly-headed; 
Eurybates, his name was—and Odysseus 
gave him preferment over the officers. 
He had a shrewd head, like the captain’s own.” 
Now hearing these details—minutely true— 
she felt more strangely moved, and tears flowed 
until she had tasted her salt grief again. 
Then she found words to answer: 
“Before this 
you won my sympathy, but now indeed 
you shall be our respected guest and friend. 
With my own hands I put that cloak and tunic 
upon him—took them folded from their place— 
and the bright brooch for ornament. 
Gone now, 
I will not meet the man again 
returning to his own home fields. Unkind 
the fate that sent him young in the long ship 
to see that misery at Ilion, unspeakable!” 
And the master improviser answered: 
“Honorable 
wife of Odysseus Laertiades, 
you need not stain your beauty with these tears, 
nor wear yourself out grieving for your husband. 
Not that I can blame you. Any wife 
grieves for the man she married in her girlhood, 
lay with in love, bore children to—though he 
may be no prince like this Odysseus, 
whom they compare even to the gods. But listen: 
weep no more, and listen: 
I have a thing to tell you, something true. 
I heard but lately of your lord’s return, 
heard that he is alive, not far away, 
among Thesprotians in their green land 
amassing fortune to bring home. His company 
went down in shipwreck in the winedark sea 
off the coast of Thrinakia. Zeus and Helios 
held it against him that his men had killed 
the kine of Helios. The crew drowned for this. 
He rode the ship’s keel. Big seas cast him up 
on the island of Phaiakians, godlike men 
who took him to their hearts. They honored him 
with many gifts and a safe passage home, 
or so they wished. Long since he should have been here, 
but he thought better to restore his fortune 
playing the vagabond about the world; 
and no adventurer could beat Odysseus 
at living by his wits—no man alive. 
I had this from King Phaidén of Thesprotia; 
and, tipping wine out, Phaidôn swore to me 
the ship was launched, the seamen standing by 
to bring Odysseus to his land at last, 
but I got out to sea ahead of him 
by the king’s order—as it chanced a freighter 
left port for the grain bins of Doulikhion. 
Phaidén, however, showed me Odysseus’ treasure. 
Ten generations of his heirs or more 
could live on what lay piled in that great room. 
The man himself had gone up to Dodona 
to ask the spelling leaves of the old oak 
what Zeus would have him do—how to return to Ithaka 
after so many years—by stealth or openly. 
You see, then, he is alive and well, and headed 
homeward now, no more to be abroad 
far from his island, his dear wife and son. 
Here is my sworn word for it. Witness this, 
god of the zenith, noblest of the gods, 
and Lord Odysseus’ hearthfire, now before me: 
I swear these things shall turn out as I say. 
Between this present dark and one day’s ebb, 
after the wane, before the crescent moon, 
Odysseus will come.” 
Penelope, 
the attentive queen, replied to him: 
“Ah, stranger, 
if what you say could ever happen! 
You would soon know our love! Our bounty, too: 
men would turn after you to call you blessed. 
But my heart tells me what must be. 
Odysseus will not come to me; no ship 
will be prepared for you. We have no master 
quick to receive and furnish out a guest 
as Lord Odysseus was. 
Or did I dream him? 
Maids, maids: come wash him, make a bed for him, 
bedstead and colored rugs and coverlets 
to let him lie warm into the gold of Dawn. 
In morning light you'll bathe him and anoint him 
so that he’ll take his place beside Telémakhos 
feasting in hall. If there be one man there 
to bully or annoy him that man wins 
no further triumph here, burn though he may. 
How will you understand me, friend, how find in me, 
more than in common women, any courage 
or gentleness, if you are kept in rags 
and filthy at our feast? Men’s lives are short. 
The hard man and his cruelties will be 
cursed behind his back, and mocked in death. 
But one whose heart and ways are kind—of him 
strangers will bear report to the wide world, 
and distant men will praise him.” 
Warily 
Odysseus answered: 
“Honorable lady, 
wife of Odysseus Laertiades, 
a weight of rugs and cover? Not for me. 
I’ve had none since the day I saw the mountains 
of Krete, white with snow, low on the sea line 
fading behind me as the long oars drove me north. 
Let me lie down tonight as I’ve lain often, 
many a night unsleeping, many a time 
afield on hard ground waiting for pure Dawn. 
No: and I have no longing for a footbath 
either: none of these maids will touch my feet, 
unless there is an old one, old and wise, 
one who has lived through suffering as I have: 
I would not mind letting my feet be touched 
by that old servant.” 
And Penélopé said: 
“Dear guest, no foreign man so sympathetic 
ever came to my house, no guest more likeable, 
so wry and humble are the things you say. 
I have an old maidservant ripe with years, 
one who in her time nursed my lord. She took him 
into her arms the hour his mother bore him. 
Let her, then, wash your feet though she is frail. 
Come here, stand by me, faithful Eurykleia, 
and bathe, bathe your master. I almost said, 
for they are of an age, and now Odysseus’ 
feet and hands would be enseamed like his. 
Men grow old soon in hardship.” 
Hearing this, 
the old nurse hid her face between her hands 
and wept hot tears, and murmured: 
“Oh, my child! 
I can do nothing for you! How Zeus hated you, 
no other man so much! No use, great heart, 
O faithful heart, the rich thighbones you burnt 
to Zeus who plays in lightning—and no man 
ever gave more to Zeus—with all your prayers 
for a green age, a tall son reared to manhood. 
There is no day of homecoming for you. 
Stranger, some women in some far off place 
perhaps have mocked my lord when he’d be home 
as now these strumpets mock you here. No wonder 
you would keep clear of all their whorishness 
and have no bath. But here am I. The queen 
Penélopé, Ikarios’ daughter, bids me; 
so let me bathe your feet to serve my lady— 
to serve you, tod. 
My heart within me stirs, 
mindful of something. Listen to what I say: 
strangers have come here, many through the years, 
but no one ever came, I swear, who seemed 
so like Odysseus—body, voice and limbs— 
as you do.” 
Ready for this, Odysseus answered: 
“Old woman, that is what they say. All who have seen 
the two of us remark how like we are, 
as you yourself have said, and rightly, too.” 
Then he kept still, while the old nurse filled up 
her basin glittering in firelight; she poured 
cold water in, then hot. 
But Lord Odysseus 
whirled suddenly from the fire to face the dark. 
The scar: he had forgotten that. She must not 
handle his scarred thigh, or the game was up. 
But when she bared her lord’s leg, bending near, 
she knew the groove at once. 
An old wound 
a boar’s white tusk inflicted, on Parnassos 
years ago. He had gone hunting there 
in company with his uncles and Autdélykos, 
his mother’s father—a great thief and swindler 
by Hermes’ favor, for Autélykos pleased him 
with burnt offerings of sheep and kids. The god 
acted as his accomplice. Well, Autélykos 
on a trip to Ithaka 
arrived just after his daughter’s boy was born. 
In fact, he had no sooner finished supper 
than Nurse Eurykleia put the baby down 
in his own lap and said: 
“Tt is for you, now, 
to choose a name for him, your child’s dear baby; 
the answer to her prayers.” 
Autélykos replied: 
“My son-in-law, my daughter, call the boy 
by the name I tell you. Well you know, my hand 
has been against the world of men and women; 
odium and distrust I’ve won. Odysseus 
should be his given name. When he grows up, 
when he comes visiting his mother’s home 
under Parnassos, where my treasures are, 
rll make him gifts and send him back rejoicing.” 
Odysseus in due course went for the gifts, 
and old Autélykos and his sons embraced him 
with welcoming sweet words; and Amphithéa, 
his mother’s mother, held him tight and kissed him, 
kissed his head and his fine eyes. 
The father 
called on his noble sons to make a feast, 
and going about it briskly they led in 
an ox of five years, whom they killed and flayed 
and cut in bits for roasting on the skewers 
with skilled hands, with care; then shared it out. 
So all the day until the sun went down 
they feasted to their hearts’ content. At evening, 
after the sun was down and dusk had come, 
they turned to bed and took the gift of sleep. 
When the young Dawn spread in the eastern sky 
her finger tips of rose, the men and dogs 
went hunting, taking Odysseus. They climbed 
Parnassos’ rugged flank mantled in forest, 
entering amid high windy folds at noon 
when Helios beat upon the valley floor 
and on the winding Ocean whence he came. 
With hounds questing ahead, in open order, 
the sons of Autólykos went down a glen, 
Odysseus in the lead, behind the dogs, 
pointing his long-shadowing spear. 
Before them 
a great boar lay hid in undergrowth, 
in a green thicket proof against the wind 
or sun’s blaze, fine soever the needling sunlight, 
impervious too to any rain, so dense 
that cover was, heaped up with fallen leaves. 
Patter of hounds’ feet, men’s feet, woke the boar 
as they came up—and from his woody ambush 
with razor back bristling and raging eyes 
he trotted and stood at bay. Odysseus, 
being on top of him, had the first shot, 
lunging to stick him; but the boar 
had already charged under the long spear. 
He hooked aslant with one white tusk and ripped out 
flesh above the knee, but missed the bone. 
Odysseus’ second thrust went home by luck, 
his bright spear passing through the shoulder joint; 
and the beast fell, moaning as life pulsed away. 
Autdlykos’ tall sons took up the wounded, 
working skillfully over the Prince Odysseus 
to bind his gash, and with a rune they stanched 
the dark flow of blood. Then downhill swiftly 
they all repaired to the father’s house, and there 
tended him well—so well they soon could send him, 
with Grandfather Autélykos’ magnificent gifts, 
rejoicing, over sea to Ithaka. 
His father and the Lady Antikleia 
welcomed him, and wanted all the news 
of how he got his wound; so he spun out 
his tale, recalling how the boar’s white tusk 
caught him when he was hunting on Parnassos. 
This was the scar the old nurse recognized; 
she traced it under her spread hands, then let go, 
and into the basin fell the lower leg 
making the bronze clang, sloshing the water out. 
Then joy and anguish seized her heart; her eyes 
filled up with tears; her throat closed, and she whispered, 
with hand held out to touch his chin: 
“Oh yes! 
You are Odysseus! Ah, dear child! I could not 
see you until now—not till I knew 
my master’s very body with my hands!” 
Her eyes turned to Penélopé with desire 
to make her lord, her husband, known—in vain, 
because Athena had bemused the queen, 
so that she took no notice, paid no heed. 
At the same time Odysseus’ right hand 
gripped the old throat; his left hand pulled her near, 
and in her ear he said: 
“Will you destroy me, 
nurse, who gave me milk at your own breast? 
Now with a hard lifetime behind I’ve come 
in the twentieth year home to my father’s island. 
You found me out, as the chance was given you. 
Be quiet; keep it from the others, else 
I warn you, and I mean it, too, 
if by my hand god brings the suitors down 
Tl! kill you, nurse or not, when the time comes— 
when the time comes to kill the other women.” 
Eurykleia kept her wits and answered him: 
“Oh, what mad words are these you let escape you! 
Child, you know my blood, my bones are yours; 
no one could whip this out of me. I’ll be 
a woman turned to stone, iron I’ll be. 
And let me tell you too—mind now—if god 
cuts down the arrogant suitors by your hand, 
I can report to you on all the maids, 
those who dishonor you, and the innocent.” 
But in response the great tactician said: 
“Nurse, no need to tell me tales of these. 
I will have seen them, each one, for myself. 
Trust in the gods, be quiet, hold your peace.” 
Silent, the old nurse went to fetch more water, 
her basin being all spilt. 
When she had washed 
and rubbed his feet with golden oil, he turned, 
dragging his bench again to the fire side 
for warmth, and hid the scar under his rags. 
Penélopé broke the silence, saying: 
“Friend, 
allow me one brief question more. You know, 
the time for bed, sweet rest, is coming soon, 
if only that warm luxury of slumber 
would come to enfold us, in our trouble. But for me 
my fate at night is anguish and no rest. 
By day being busy, seeing to my work, 
I find relief sometimes from loss and sorrow; 
but when night comes and all the world’s abed 
I lie in mine alone, my heart thudding, 
while bitter thoughts and fears crowd on my grief. 
Think how Pandareos’ daughter, pale forever, 
sings as the nightingale in the new leaves 
through those long quiet hours of night, 
on some thick-flowering orchard bough in spring; 
how she rills out and tilts her note, high now, now low, 
mourning for Itylos whom she killed in madness— 
her child, and her lord Zethos’ only child. 
My forlorn thought flows variable as her song, 
wondering: shall I stay beside my son 
and guard my own things here, my maids, my hall, 
to honor my lord’s bed and the common talk? 
Or had I best join fortunes with a suitor, 
the noblest one, most lavish in his gifts? 
Is it now time for that? 
My son being still a callow boy forbade 
marriage, or absence from my lord’s domain; 
but now the child is grown, grown up, a man, 
he, too, begins to pray for my departure, 
aghast at all the suitors gorge on. 
Listen: 
interpret me this dream: From a water’s edge 
twenty fat geese have come to feed on grain 
beside my house. And I delight to see them. 
But now a mountain eagle with great wings 
and crooked beak storms in to break their necks 
and strew their bodies here. Away he soars 
into the bright sky; and I cry aloud— 
all this in dream—I wail and round me gather 
softly braided Akhaian women mourning 
because the eagle killed my geese. 
Then down 
out of the sky he drops to a cornice beam 
with mortal voice telling me not to weep. 
‘Be glad,’ says he, ‘renowned Ikarios’ daughter: 
here is no dream but something real as day, 
something about to happen. All those geese 
were suitors, and the bird was I. See now, 
I am no eagle but your lord come back 
to bring inglorious death upon them all!’ 
As he said this, my honeyed slumber left me. 
Peering through half-shut eyes, I saw the geese 
in hall, still feeding at the self-same trough.” 
The master of subtle ways and straight replied: 
“My dear, how can you choose to read the dream 
differently? Has not Odysseus himself 
shown you what is to come? Death to the suitors, 
sure death, too. Not one escapes his doom.” 
Penélopé shook her head and answered: 
“Friend, 
many and many a dream is mere confusion, 
a cobweb of no consequence at all. 
Two gates for ghostly dreams there are: one gateway 
of honest horn, and one of ivory. 
Issuing by the ivory gate are dreams 
of glimmering illusion, fantasies, 
but those that come through solid polished horn 
may be borne out, if mortals only know them. 
I doubt it came by horn, my fearful dream— 
too good to be true, that, for my son and me. 
But one thing more I wish to tell you: listen 
carefully. It is a black day, this that comes. 
Odysseus’ house and I are to be parted. 
I shall decree a contest for the day. 
We have twelve axe heads. In his time, my lord 
could line them up, all twelve, at intervals 
like a ship’s ribbing; then he’d back away 
a long way off and whip an arrow through. 
Now I'll impose this trial on the suitors. 
The one who easily handles and strings the bow 
and shoots through all twelve axes I shall marry, 
whoever he may be—then look my last 
on this my first love’s beautiful brimming house. 
But Ill remember, though I dream it only.” 
Odysseus said: 
“Dear honorable lady, 
wife of Odysseus Laertiades, 
let there be no postponement of the trial. 
Odysseus, who knows the shifts of combat, 
will be here: aye, he’ll be here long before 
one of these lads can stretch or string that bow 
or shoot to thread the iron!” 
Grave and wise, 
Penelope replied: 
“If you were willing 
to sit with me and comfort me, my friend, 
no tide of sleep would ever close my eyes. 
But mortals cannot go forever sleepless. 
This the undying gods decree for all 
who live and die on earth, kind furrowed earth. 
Upstairs I go, then, to my single bed, 
my sighing bed, wet with so many tears 
after my Lord Odysseus took ship 
to see that misery at Ilion, unspeakable. 
Let me rest there, you here. You can stretch out 
on the bare floor, or else command a bed.” 
So she went up to her chamber softly lit, 
accompanied by her maids. Once there, she wept 
for Odysseus, her husband, till Athena 
cast sweet sleep upon her eyes. 


BOOK 20

Outside in the entry way he made his bed— 
raw oxhide spread on level ground, and heaped up 
fleeces, left from sheep the Akhaians killed. 
And when he had lain down, Eurynome 
flung out a robe to cover him. Unsleeping 
the Lord Odysseus lay, and roved in thought 
to the undoing of his enemies. 
Now came a covey of women 
laughing as they slipped out, arm in arm, 
as many a night before, to the suitors’ beds; 
and anger took him like a wave to leap 
into their midst and kill them, every one— 
or should he let them all go hot to bed 
one final night? His heart cried out within him 
the way a brach with whelps between her legs 
would howl and bristle at a stranger—so 
the hackles of his heart rose at that laughter. 
Knocking his breast he muttered to himself: 
“Down; be steady. You’ve seen worse, that time 
the Kyklops like a rockslide ate your men 
while you looked on. Nobody, only guile, 
got you out of that cave alive.” 
His rage 
held hard in leash, submitted to his mind, 
while he himself rocked, rolling from side to side, 
as a cook turns a sausage, big with blood 
and fat, at a scorching blaze, without a pause, 
to broil it quick: so he rolled left and right, 
casting about to see how he, alone, 
against the false outrageous crowd of suitors 
could press the fight. 
And out of the night sky 
Athena came to him; out of the nearby dark 
in body like a woman; came and stood 
over his head to chide him: 
“Why so wakeful, 
most forlorn of men? Here is your home, 
there lies your lady; and your son is here, 
as fine as one could wish a son to be.” 
Odysseus looked up and answered: 
“Aye, 
goddess, that much is true; but still 
I have some cause to fret in this affair. 
I am one man; how can I whip those dogs? 
They are always here in force. Neither 
is that the end of it, there’s more to come. 
If by the will of Zeus and by your will 
I killed them all, where could I go for safety? 
Tell me that!” 
And the grey-eyed goddess said: 
“Your touching faith! Another man would trust 
some villainous mortal, with no brains—and what 
am I? Your goddess-guardian to the end 
in all your trials. Let it be plain as day: 
if fifty bands of men surrounded us 
and every sword sang for your blood, 
you could make off still with their cows and sheep. 
Now you, too, go to sleep. This all night vigil 
wearies the flesh. You’ll come out soon enough 
on the other side of trouble.” 
Raining soft 
sleep on his eyes, the beautiful one was gone 
back to Olympos. Now at peace, the man 
slumbered and lay still, but not his lady. 
Wakeful again with all her cares, reclining 
in the soft bed, she wept and cried aloud 
until she had had her fill of tears, then spoke 
in prayer first to Artemis: 
“O gracious 
divine lady Artemis, daughter of Zeus, 
if you could only make an end now quickly, 
let the arrow fly, stop my heart, 
or if some wind could take me by the hair 
up into running cloud, to plunge in tides of Ocean, 
as hurricane winds took Pandareos’ daughters 
when they were left at home alone. The gods 
had sapped their parents’ lives. But Aphrodite 
fed those children honey, cheese, and wine, 
and Hera gave them looks and wit, and Artemis, 
pure Artemis, gave lovely height, and wise 
Athena made them practised in her arts— 
till Aphrodite in glory walked on Olympos, 
begging for each a happy wedding day 
from Zeus, the lightning’s joyous king, who knows 
all fate of mortals, fair and foul— 
but even at that hour the cyclone winds 
had ravished them away 
to serve the loathsome Furies. 
Let me be 
blown out by the Olympians! Shot by Artemis, 
I still might go and see amid the shades 
Odysseus in the rot of underworld. 
No coward’s eye should light by my consenting! 
Evil may be endured when our days pass 
in mourning, heavy-hearted, hard beset, 
if only sleep reign over nighttime, blanketing 
the world’s good and evil from our eyes. 
But not for me: dreams too my demon sends me. 
Tonight the image of my lord came by 
as I remember him with troops. O strange 
exultation! I thought him real, and not a dream.” 
Now as the Dawn appeared all stitched in gold, 
the queen’s cry reached Odysseus at his waking, 
so that he wondered, half asleep: it seemed 
she knew him, and stood near him! Then he woke 
and picked his bedding up to stow away 
on a chair in the megaron. The oxhide pad 
he took outdoors. There, spreading wide his arms, 
he prayed: 
“O Father Zeus, if over land and water, 
after adversity, you willed to bring me home, 
let someone in the waking house give me good augury, 
and a sign be shown, too, in the outer world.” 
He prayed thus, and the mind of Zeus in heaven 
heard him. He thundered out of bright Olympos 
down from above the cloudlands in reply— 
a rousing peal for Odysseus. Then a token 
came to him from a woman grinding flour 
in the court nearby. His own handmills were there, 
and twelve maids had the job of grinding out 
whole grain and barley meal, the pith of men. 
Now all the rest, their bushels ground, were sleeping; 
one only, frail and slow, kept at it still. 
She stopped, stayed her hand, and her lord heard 
the omen from her lips: 
“Ah, Father Zeus 
almighty over gods and men! 
A great bang of thunder that was, surely, 
out of the starry sky, and not a cloud in sight. 
It is your nod to someone. Hear me, then, 
make what I say come true: 
let this day be the last the suitors feed 
so dainty in Odysseus’ hall! 
They’ve made me work my heart out till I drop, 
grinding barley. May they feast no more!” 
The servant’s prayer, after the cloudless thunder 
of Zeus, Odysseus heard with lifting heart, 
sure in his bones that vengeance was at hand. 
Then other servants, wakening, came down 
to build and light a fresh fire at the hearth. 
Telémakhos, clear-eyed as a god, awoke, 
put on his shirt and belted on his sword, 
bound rawhide sandals under his smooth feet, 
and took his bronze-shod lance. He came and stood 
on the broad sill of the doorway, calling Eurykleia: 
“Nurse, dear Nurse, how did you treat our guest? 
Had he a supper and a good bed? Has he lain 
uncared for still? My mother is like that, 
perverse for all her cleverness: 
she’d entertain some riff-raff, and turn out 
a solid man.” 
The old nurse answered him: 
“T would not be so quick to accuse her, child. 
He sat and drank here while he had a mind to; 
food he no longer hungered for, he said— 
for she did ask him. When he thought of sleeping, 
she ordered them to make a bed. Poor soul! 
Poor gentleman! So humble and so miserable, 
, he would accept no bed with rugs to lie on, 
but slept on sheepskins and a raw oxhide 
in the entry way. We covered him ourselves.” 
Telémakhos left the hall, hefting his lance, 
with two swift flickering hounds for company, 
to face the island Akhaians in the square; 
and gently born Eurykleia the daughter 
of Ops Peisenoridés, called to the maids: 
“Bestir yourselves! you have your brooms, go sprinkle 
the rooms and sweep them, robe the chairs in red, 
sponge off the tables till they shine. 
Wash out the winebowls and two-handled cups. 
You others go fetch water from the spring; 
no loitering; come straight back. Our company 
will be here soon; morning is sure to bring them; 
everyone has a holiday today.” 
The women ran to obey her—twenty girls 
off to the spring with jars for dusky water, 
the rest at work inside. Then tall woodcutters 
entered to split up logs for the hearth fire, 
the water carriers returned; and on their heels 
arrived the swineherd, driving three fat pigs, 
chosen among his pens. In the wide court 
he let them feed, and said to Odysseus kindly: 
“Friend, are they more respectful of you now, 
or still insulting you?” 
Replied Odysseus: 
“The young men, yes. And may the gods requite 
those insolent puppies for the game they play 
in a home not their own. They have no decency.” 
During this talk, Melanthios the goatherd 
came in, driving goats for the suitors’ feast, 
with his two herdsmen. Under the portico 
they tied the animals, and Melanthios 
looked at Odysseus with a sneer. Said he: 
“Stranger, 
I see you mean to stay and turn our stomachs 
begging in this hall. Clear out, why don’t you? 
Or will you have to taste a bloody beating 
before you see the point? Your begging ways 
nauseate everyone. There are feasts elsewhere.” 
Odysseus answered not a word, but grimly 
shook his head over his murderous heart. 
A third man came up now: Philoitios 
the cattle foreman, with an ox behind him 
and fat goats for the suitors. Ferrymen 
had brought these from the mainland, as they bring 
travellers, too—whoever comes along. 
Philoitios tied the beasts under the portico 
and joined the swineherd. 
“Who is this,” he said, 
“Who is the new arrival at the manor? 
Akhaian? or what else does he claim to be? 
Where are his family and fields of home? 
Down on his luck, all right: carries himself like a captain. 
How the immortal gods can change and drag us down 
once they begin to spin dark days for us!— 
Kings and commanders, too.” 
Then he stepped over 
and took Odysseus by the right hand, saying: 
“Welcome, Sir. May good luck lie ahead 
at the next turn. Hard times you’re having, surely. 
O Zeus! no god is more berserk in heaven 
if gentle folk, whom you yourself begot, 
you plunge in grief and hardship without mercy! 
Sir, I began to sweat when I first saw you, 
and tears came to my eyes, remembering 
Odysseus: rags like these he may be wearing 
somewhere on his wanderings now— 
I mean, if he’s alive still under the sun. 
But if he’s dead and in the house of Death, 
I mourn Odysseus. He entrusted cows to me 
in Kephallenia, when I was knee high, 
and now his herds are numberless, no man else 
ever had cattle multiply like grain. 
But new men tell me I must bring my beeves 
to feed them, who care nothing for our prince, 
fear nothing from the watchful gods. They crave 
partition of our lost king’s land and wealth. 
My own feelings keep going round and round 
upon this tether: can I desert the boy 
by moving, herds and all, to another country, 
a new life among strangers? Yet it’s worse 
to stay here, in my old post, herding cattle 
for upstarts. 
Pd have gone long since, 
gone, taken service with another king; this shame 
is no more to be borne; but I keep thinking 
my own lord, poor devil, still might come 
and make a rout of suitors in his hall.” 
Odysseus, with his mind on action, answered: 
“Herdsman, I make you out to be no coward 
and no fool: I can see that for myself. 
So let me tell you this. I swear by Zeus 
all highest, by the table set for friends, 
and by your king’s hearthstone to which I’ve come, 
Odysseus will return. You’ll be on hand 
to see, if you care to see it, 
how those who lord it here will be cut down.” 
The cowman said: 
“Would god it all came true! 
You'd see the fight that’s in me!” 
Then Eumaios 
echoed him, and invoked the gods, and prayed 
that his great-minded master should return. 
While these three talked, the suitors in the field 
had come together plotting—what but death 
for Telémakhos?—when from the left an eagle 
crossed high with a rockdove in his claws. 
Amphinomos got up. Said he, cutting them short: 
“Friends, no luck lies in that plan for us, 
no luck, knifing the lad. Let’s think of feasting.” 
A grateful thought, they felt, and walking on 
entered the great hall of the hero Odysseus, 
where they all dropped their cloaks on chairs or couches 
and made a ritual slaughter, knifing sheep, 
fat goats and pigs, knifing the grass-fed steer. 
Then tripes were broiled and eaten. Mixing bowls 
were filled with wine. The swineherd passed out cups, 
Philoitios, chief cowherd, dealt the loaves 
into the panniers, Melanthios poured wine, 
and all their hands went out upon the feast. 
Telémakhos placed his father to advantage 
just at the door sill of the pillared hall, 
setting a stool there and a sawed-off table, 
gave him a share of tripes, poured out his wine 
in a golden cup, and said: 
“Stay here, sit down 
to drink with our young friends. I stand between you 
and any cutting word or cuffing hand 
from any suitor. Here is no public house 
but the old home of Odysseus, my inheritance. 
Hold your tongues then, gentlemen, and your blows, 
and let no wrangling start, no scuffle either.” 
The others, disconcerted, bit their lips 
at the ring in the young man’s voice. Antinoös, 
Eupeithes’ son, turned round to them and said: 
“It goes against the grain, my lords, but still 
I say we take this hectoring by Telémakhos. 
You know Zeus balked at it, or else 
we might have shut his mouth a long time past, 
the silvery speaker.” 
But Telémakhos 
paid no heed to what Antinods said. 
Now public heralds wound through Ithaka 
leading a file of beasts for sacrifice, and islanders 
gathered under the shade trees of Apollo, 
in the precinct of the Archer—while in hall 
the suitors roasted mutton and fat beef 
on skewers, pulling off the fragrant cuts; 
and those who did the roasting served Odysseus 
a portion equal to their own, for so 
Telémakhos commanded. 
But Athena 
had no desire now to let the suitors 
restrain themselves from wounding words and acts. 
Laértés’ son again must be offended. 
There was a scapegrace fellow in the crowd 
named Ktésippos, a Samian, rich beyond 
all measure, arrogant with riches, early 
and late a bidder for Odysseus’ queen. 
Now this one called attention to himself: 
“Hear me, my lords, I have a thing to say. 
Our friend has had his fair share from the start 
and that’s polite; it would be most improper 
if we were cold to guests of Telémakhos— 
no matter what tramp turns up. Well then, look here, 
let me throw in my own small contribution. 
He must have prizes to confer, himself, 
on some brave bathman or another slave 
here in Odysseus’ house.” 
His hand went backward 
and, fishing out a cow’s foot from the basket, 
he let it fly. 
Odysseus rolled his head 
to one side softly, ducking the blow, and smiled 
a crooked smile with teeth clenched. On the wall 
the cow’s foot struck and fell. Telémakhos 
blazed up: 
“Ktésippos, lucky for you, by heaven, 
not to have hit him! He took care of himself, 
else you’d have had my lance-head in your belly; 
no marriage, but a grave instead on Ithaka 
for your father’s pains. 
You others, let me see 
no more contemptible conduct in my house! 
I’ve been awake to it for a long time—by now 
I know what is honorable and what is not. 
Before, I was a child. I can endure it 
while sheep are slaughtered, wine drunk up, and bread— 
can one man check the greed of a hundred men?— 
but I will suffer no more viciousness. 
Granted you mean at last to cut me down: 
I welcome that—better to die than have 
humiliation always before my eyes, 
the stranger buffeted, and the serving women 
dragged about, abused in a noble house.” 
They quieted, grew still, under his lashing, 
and after a long silence, Agelaos, 
Damastor’s son, spoke to them all: 
“Friends, friends, 
I hope no one will answer like a fishwife. 
What has been said is true. Hands off this stranger, 
he is no target, neither is any servant 
here in the hall of King Odysseus. 
Let me say a word, though, to Telémakhos 
and to his mother, if it please them both: 
as long as hope remained in you to see 
Odysseus, that great gifted man, again, 
you could not be reproached for obstinacy, 
tying the suitors down here; better so, 
if still your father fared the great sea homeward. 
How plain it is, though, now, he’ll come no more! 
Go sit then by your mother, reason with her, 
tell her to take the best man, highest bidder, 
and you can have and hold your patrimony, 
feed on it, drink it all, while she 
adorns another’s house.” 
Keeping his head, 
Telémakhos replied: 
“By Zeus Almighty, 
Agelaos, and by my father’s sufferings, 
far from Ithaka, whether he’s dead or lost, 
I make no impediment to Mother’s marriage. 
‘Take whom you wish,’ I say, ‘Pll add my dowry.’ 
But can I pack her off against her will 
from her own home? Heaven forbid!” 
At this, 
Pallas Athena touched off in the suitors 
a fit of laughter, uncontrollable. 
She drove them into nightmare, till they wheezed 
and neighed as though with jaws no longer theirs, 
while blood defiled their meat, and blurring tears 
flooded their eyes, heart-sore with woe to come. 
Then said the visionary, Theoklymenos: 
“O lost sad men, what terror is this you suffer? 
Night shrouds you to the knees, your heads, your faces; 
dry retch of death runs round like fire in sticks; 
your cheeks are streaming; these fair walls and pedestals 
are dripping crimson blood. And thick with shades 
is the entry way, the courtyard thick with shades 
passing athirst toward Erebos, into the dark, 
the sun is quenched in heaven, foul mist hems us in ... 
The young men greeted this with shouts of laughter, 
and Eurymakhos, the son of Pélybos, crowed: 
“The mind of our new guest has gone astray. 
Hustle him out of doors, lads, into the sunlight; 
he finds it dark as night inside!” 
The man of vision looked at him and said: 
“When I need help, PFI ask for it, Eurymakhos. 
I have my eyes and ears, a pair of legs, 
and a straight mind, still with me. These will do 
to take me out. Damnation and black night 
I see arriving for yourselves: no shelter, 
no defence for any in this crowd— 
fools and vipers in the king’s own hall.” 
With this he left that handsome room and went 
home to Peiraios, who received him kindly. 
The suitors made wide eyes at one another 
and set to work provoking Telémakhos 
with jokes about his friends. One said, for instance: 
“Telémakhos, no man is a luckier host 
when it comes to what the cat dragged in. What burning 
eyes your beggar had for bread and wine! 
But not for labor, not for a single heave— 
he’d be a deadweight on a field. Then comes 
this other, with his mumbo-jumbo. Boy, 
for your own good, I tell you, toss them both 
into a slave ship for the Sikels. That would pay you.” 
Telémakhos ignored the suitors’ talk. 
He kept his eyes in silence on his father, 
awaiting the first blow. Meanwhile 
the daughter of Ikarios, Penelope, 
had placed her chair to look across and down 
on father and son at bay; she heard the crowd, 
and how they laughed as they resumed their dinner, 
a fragrant feast, for many beasts were slain— 
but as for supper, men supped never colder 
than these, on what the goddess and the warrior 
were even then preparing for the suitors, 
whose treachery had filled that house with pain. 


BOOK 21

Upon Penélopé, most worn in love and thought, 
Athena cast a glance like a grey sea 
lifting her. Now to bring the tough bow out and bring 
the iron blades. Now try those dogs at archery 
to usher bloody slaughter in. 
So moving stairward 
the queen took up a fine doorhook of bronze, 
ivory-hafted, smooth in her clenched hand, 
and led her maids down to a distant room, 
a storeroom where the master’s treasure lay: 
bronze, bar gold, black iron forged and wrought. 
In this place hung the double-torsion bow 
and arrows in a quiver, a great sheaf— 
quills of groaning. 
In the old time in Lakedaimon 
her lord had got these arms from Iphitos, 
Eurytos’ son. The two met in Messenia 
at Ortilokhos’ table, on the day 
Odysseus claimed a debt owed by that realm— 
sheep stolen by Messenians out of Ithaka 
in their long ships, three hundred head, and herdsmen. 
Seniors of Ithaka and his father sent him 
on that far embassy when he was young. 
, But Iphitos had come there tracking strays, 
twelve shy mares, with mule colts yet unweaned. 
And a fatal chase they led him over prairies 
into the hands of Heraklés. That massive 
son of toil and mortal son of Zeus 
murdered his guest at wine in his own house— 
inhuman, shameless in the sight of heaven— 
to keep the mares and colts in his own grange. 
Now Iphitos, when he knew Odysseus, gave him 
the master bowman’s arm; for old Eurytos 
had left it on his deathbed to his son. 
In fellowship Odysseus gave a lance 
and a sharp sword. But Heraklés killed Iphitos 
before one friend could play host to the other. 
And Lord Odysseus would not take the bow 
in the black ships to the great war at Troy. 
As a keepsake he put it by: 
it served him well at home in Ithaka. 
Now the queen reached the storeroom door and halted. 
Here was an oaken sill, cut long ago 
and sanded clean and bedded true. Foursquare 
the doorjambs and the shining doors were set 
by the careful builder. Penélopé untied the strap 
around the curving handle, pushed her hook 
into the slit, aimed at the bolts inside 
and shot them back. Then came a rasping sound 
as those bright doors the key had sprung gave way— 
a bellow like a bull’s vaunt in a meadow— 
followed by her light footfall entering 
over the plank floor. Herb-scented robes 
lay there in chests, but the lady’s milkwhite arms 
went up to lift the bow down from a peg 
in its own polished bowcase. 
Now Penelope 
sank down, holding the weapon on her knees, 
and drew her husband’s great bow out, and sobbed 
and bit her lip and let the salt tears flow. 
Then back she went to face the crowded hall, 
tremendous bow in hand, and on her shoulder hung 
the quiver spiked with coughing death. Behind her 
maids bore a basket full of axeheads, bronze 
and iron implements for the master’s game. 
Thus in her beauty she approached the suitors, 
and near a pillar of the solid roof 
she paused, her shining veil across her cheeks, 
her maids on either hand and still, 
then spoke to the banqueters: 
“My lords, hear me: 
suitors indeed, you commandeered this house 
to feast and drink in, day and night, my husband 
being long gone, long out of mind. You found 
no justification for yourselves—none 
except your lust to marry me. Stand up, then: 
we now declare a contest for that prize. 
Here is my lord Odysseus’ hunting bow. 
Bend and string it if you can. Who sends an arrow 
through iron axe-helve sockets, twelve in line? 
I join my life with his, and leave this place, my home, 
my rich and beautiful bridal house, forever 
to be remembered, though I dream it only.” 
Then to Eumaios: 
“Carry the bow forward. 
Carry the blades.” 
Tears came to the swineherd’s eyes 
as he reached out for the big bow. He laid it 
down at the suitors’ feet. Across the room 
the cowherd sobbed, knowing the master’s weapon. 
Antínoös growled, with a glance at both: 
“Clods. 
They go to pieces over nothing. 
You two, there, 
why are you sniveling? To upset the woman 
even more? Has she not pain enough 
over her lost husband? Sit down. 
Get on with dinner quietly, or cry about it 
outside, if you must. Leave us the bow. 
A clean-cut game, it looks to me. 
Nobody bends that bowstave easily 
in this company. Is there a man here 
made like Odysseus? I remember him 
from childhood: I can see him even now.” 
That was the way he played it, hoping inwardly 
to span the great horn bow with corded gut 
and drill the iron with his shot—he, Antinos, 
destined to be the first of all to savor 
blood from a biting arrow at his throat, 
a shaft drawn by the fingers of Odysseus 
whom he had mocked and plundered, leading on 
the rest, his boon companions. Now they heard 
a gay snort of laughter from Telémakhos, 
who said then brilliantly: 
“A queer thing, that! 
Has Zeus almighty made me a half-wit? 
For all her spirit, Mother has given in, 
promised to go off with someone—and 
is that amusing? What am I cackling for? 
Step up, my lords, contend now for your prize. 
There is no woman like her in Akhaia, 
not in old Argos, Pylos, or Mykene, 
neither in Ithaka nor on the mainland, 
and you all know it without praise of mine. 
Come on, no hanging back, no more delay 
in getting the bow bent. Who’s the winner? 
I myself should like to try that bow. 
Suppose I bend it and bring off the shot, 
my heart will be less heavy, seeing the queen my mother 
go for the last time from this house and hall, 
if I who stay can do my father’s feat.” 
He moved out quickly, dropping his crimson cloak, 
and lifted sword and sword belt from his shoulders. 
His preparation was to dig a trench, 
heaping the earth in a long ridge beside it 
to hold the blades half-bedded. A taut cord 
aligned the socket rings. And no one there 
but looked on wondering at his workmanship, 
for the boy had never seen it done. 
He took his stand then 
on the broad door sill to attempt the bow. 
Three times he put his back into it and sprang it, 
three times he had to slack off. Still he meant 
to string that bow and pull for the needle shot. 
A fourth try and he had it all but strung— 
when a stiffening in Odysseus made him check. 
Abruptly then he stopped and turned and said: 
“Blast and damn it, must I be a milksop 
all my life? Half-grown, all thumbs, 
no strength or knack at arms, to defend myself 
if someone picks a fight with me. 
Take over, 
O my elders and betters, try the bow, 
run off the contest.” 
And he stood the weapon 
upright against the massy-timbered door 
with one arrow across the horn aslant, 
then went back to his chair. Antinoés 
gave the word: 
“Now one man at a time 
rise and go forward. Round the room in order; 
left to right from where they dip the wine.” 
As this seemed fair enough, up stood Leédés 
the son of Oinops. This man used to find 
visions for them in the smoke of sacrifice. 
He kept his chair well back, retired by the winebowl, 
for he alone could not abide their manners 
but sat in shame for all the rest. Now it was he 
who had first to confront the bow, 
standing up on the broad door sill. He failed. 
The bow unbending made his thin hands yield, 
no muscle in them. He gave up and said: 
“Friends, I cannot. Let the next man handle it. 
Here is a bow to break the heart and spirit 
of many strong men. Aye. And death is less 
bitter than to live on and never have 
the beauty that we came here laying siege to 
so many days. Resolute, are you still, 
to win Odysseus’ lady Penélopé? 
Pit yourselves against the bow, and look 
among Akhaians for another’s daughter. 
Gifts will be enough to court and take her. 
Let the best offer win.” 
With this Leddés 
thrust the bow away from him, and left it 
upright against the massy-timbered door, 
with one arrow aslant across the horn. 
As he went down to his chair he heard Antinoés 
voice rising: 
? 
“What is that you say? 
It makes me burn. You cannot string the weapon, 
so ‘Here is a bow to break the heart and spirit 
of many strong men.’ Crushing thought! 
You were not born—you never had it in you— 
to pull that bow or let an arrow fly. 
But here are men who can and will.” 
He called out to the goatherd, Melanthios: 
“Kindle a fire there, be quick about it, 
draw up a big bench with a sheepskin on it, 
and bring a cake of lard out of the stores. 
Contenders from now on will heat and grease the bow. 
We'll try it limber, and bring off the shot.” 
Melanthios darted out to light a blaze, 
drew up a bench, threw a big sheepskin over it, 
and brought a cake of lard. So one by one 
the young men warmed and greased the bow for bending, 
but not a man could string it. They were whipped. 
Antinoos held off; so did Eurymakhos, 
suitors in chief, by far the ablest there. 
Two men had meanwhile left the hall: 
swineherd and cowherd, in companionship, 
one downcast as the other. But Odysseus 
followed them outdoors, outside the court, 
and coming up said gently: 
“You, herdsman, 
and you, too, swineherd, I could say a thing to you, 
or should I keep it dark? 
No, no; speak, 
my heart tells me. Would you be men enough 
to stand by Odysseus if he came back? 
Suppose he dropped out of a clear sky, as I did? 
Suppose some god should bring him? 
Would you bear arms for him, or for the suitors?” 
The cowherd said: 
“Ah, let the master come! 
Father Zeus, grant our old wish! Some courier 
guide him back! Then judge what stuff is in me 
and how I manage arms!” 
Likewise Eumaios 
fell to praying all heaven for his return, 
so that Odysseus, sure at least of these, 
told them: 
“I am at home, for I am he. 
I bore adversities, but in the twentieth year 
I am ashore in my own land. I find 
the two of you, alone among my people, 
longed for my coming. Prayers I never heard 
except your own that I might come again. 
So now what is in store for you I’ll tell you: 
If Zeus brings down the suitors by my hand 
I promise marriages to both, and cattle, 
and houses built near mine. And you shall be 
brothers-in-arms of my Telémakhos. 
Here, let me show you something else, a sign 
that I am he, that you can trust me, look: 
this old scar from the tusk wound that I got 
boar hunting on Parnassos— 
Autdélykos’ sons and I.” 
Shifting his rags 
he bared the long gash. Both men looked, and knew, 
and threw their arms around the old soldier, weeping, 
kissing his head and shoulders. He as well 
took each man’s head and hands to kiss, then said— 
to cut it short, else they might weep till dark— 
“Break off, no more of this. 
Anyone at the door could see and tell them. 
Drift back in, but separately at intervals 
after me. 
Now listen to your orders: 
when the time comes, those gentlemen, to a man, 
will be dead against giving me bow or quiver. 
Defy them. Eumaios, bring the bow 
and put it in my hands there at the door. 
Tell the women to lock their own door tight. 
Tell them if someone hears the shock of arms 
or groans of men, in hall or court, not one 
must show her face, but keep still at her weaving. 
Philoitios, run to the outer gate and lock it. 
Throw the cross bar and lash it.” 
He turned back 
into the courtyard and the beautiful house 
and took the stool he had before. They followed 
one by one, the two hands loyal to him. 
Eurymakhos had now picked up the bow. 
He turned it round, and turned it round 
before the licking flame to warm it up, 
but could not, even so, put stress upon it 
to jam the loop over the tip 
though his heart groaned to bursting. 
Then he said grimly: 
“Curse this day. 
What gloom I feel, not for myself alone, 
and not only because we lose that bride. 
Women are not lacking in Akhaia, 
in other towns, or on Ithaka. No, the worst 
is humiliation—to be shown up for children 
measured against Odysseus—we who cannot 
even hitch the string over his bow. 
What shame to be repeated of us, after us!” 
Antinoos said: 
“Come to yourself. You know 
that is not the way this business ends. 
Today the islanders held holiday, a holy day, 
no day to sweat over a bowstring. 
Keep your head. 
Postpone the bow. I say we leave the axes 
planted where they are. No one will take them. 
No one comes to Odysseus’ hall tonight. 
Break out good wine and brim our cups again, 
we'll keep the crooked bow safe overnight, 
order the fattest goats Melanthios has 
brought down tomorrow noon, and offer thighbones burning 
to Apollo, god of archers, 
while we try out the bow and make the shot.” 
As this appealed to everyone, heralds came 
pouring fresh water for their hands, and boys 
filled up the winebowls. Joints of meat went round, 
fresh cuts for all, while each man made his offering, 
tilting the red wine to the gods, and drank his fill. 
Then spoke Odysseus, all craft and gall: 
“My lords, contenders for the queen, permit me: 
a passion in me moves me to speak out. 
I put it to Eurymakhos above all 
and to that brilliant prince, Antinods. Just now 
how wise his counsel was, to leave the trial 
and turn your thoughts to the immortal gods! Apollo 
will give power tomorrow to whom he wills. 
But let me try my hand at the smooth bow! 
Let me test my fingers and my pull 
to see if any of the oldtime kick is there, 
or if thin fare and roving took it out of me.” 
Now irritation beyond reason swept them all, 
since they were nagged by fear that he could string it. 
Antinoés answered, coldly and at length: 
“You bleary vagabond, no rag of sense is left you. 
Are you not coddled here enough, at table 
taking meat with gentlemen, your betters, 
denied nothing, and listening to our talk? 
When have we let a tramp hear all our talk? 
The sweet goad of wine has made you rave! 
Here is the evil wine can do 
to those who swig it down. Even the centaur 
Eurytion, in Peirithods’ hall 
among the Lapithai, came to a bloody end 
because of wine; wine ruined him: it crazed him, 
drove him wild for rape in that great house. 
The princes cornered him in fury, leaping on him 
to drag him out and crop his ears and nose. 
Drink had destroyed his mind, and so he ended 
in that mutilation—fool that he was. 
Centaurs and men made war for this, 
but the drunkard first brought hurt upon himself. 
The tale applies to you: I promise you 
great trouble if you touch that bow. You'll come by 
no indulgence in our house; kicked down 
into a ship’s bilge, out to sea you go, 
and nothing saves you. Drink, but hold your tongue. 
Make no contention here with younger men.” 
At this the watchful queen Penelope 
interposed: 
“Antinoos, discourtesy 
to a guest of Telémakhos—whatever guest— 
that is not handsome. What are you afraid of? 
Suppose this exile put his back into it 
and drew the great bow of Odysseus— 
could he then take me home to be his bride? 
You know he does not imagine that! No one 
need let that prospect weigh upon his dinner! 
How very, very improbable it seems.” 
It was Eurymakhos who answered her: 
“Penelope, O daughter of Ikarios, 
most subtle queen, we are not given to fantasy. 
No, but our ears burn at what men might say 
and women, too. We hear some jackal whispering: 
‘How far inferior to the great husband 
her suitors are! Can’t even budge his bow! 
Think of it; and a beggar, out of nowhere, 
strung it quick and made the needle shot!’ 
That kind of disrepute we would not care for.” 
Penelope replied, steadfast and wary: 
“Eurymakhos, you have no good repute 
in this realm, nor the faintest hope of it— 
men who abused a prince’s house for years, 
consumed his wine and cattle. Shame enough. 
Why hang your heads over a trifle now? 
The stranger is a big man, well-compacted, 
and claims to be of noble blood. 
Ai! 
Give him the bow, and let us have it out! 
What I can promise him I will: 
if by the kindness of Apollo he prevails 
he shall be clothed well and equipped. 
A fine shirt and a cloak I promise him; 
a lance for keeping dogs at bay, or men; 
a broadsword; sandals to protect his feet; 
escort, and freedom to go where he will.” 
Telémakhos now faced her and said sharply: 
“Mother, as to the bow and who may handle it 
or not handle it, no man here 
has more authority than I do—not one lord 
of our own stony Ithaka nor the islands lying 
east toward Elis: no one stops me if I choose 
to give these weapons outright to my guest. 
Return to your own hall. Tend your spindle. 
Tend your loom. Direct your maids at work. 
This question of the bow will be for men to settle, 
most of all for me. I am master here.” 
She gazed in wonder, turned, and so withdrew, 
her son’s clearheaded bravery in her heart. 
But when she had mounted to her rooms again 
with all her women, then she fell to weeping 
for Odysseus, her husband. Grey-eyed Athena 
presently cast a sweet sleep on her eyes. 
The swineherd had the horned bow in his hands 
moving toward Odysseus, when the crowd 
in the banquet hall broke into an ugly din, 
shouts rising from the flushed young men: 
“Ho! Where 
do you think you are taking that, you smutty slave?” 
“What is this dithering?” 
“We'll toss you back alone 
among the pigs, for your own dogs to eat, 
if bright Apollo nods and the gods are kind!” 
He faltered, all at once put down the bow, and stood 
in panic, buffeted by waves of cries, 
hearing Telémakhos from another quarter 
shout: 
“Go on, take him the bow! 
Do you obey this pack? 
You will be stoned back to your hills! Young as I am 
my power is over you! I wish to God 
I had as much the upper hand of these! 
There would be suitors pitched like dead rats 
through our gate, for the evil plotted here!” 
Telémakhos’ frenzy struck someone as funny, 
and soon the whole room roared with laughter at him, 
so that all tension passed. Eumaios picked up 
bow and quiver, making for the door, 
and there he placed them in Odysseus’ hands. 
Calling Eurykleia to his side he said: 
“Telémakhos 
trusts you to take care of the women’s doorway. 
Lock it tight. If anyone inside 
should hear the shock of arms or groans of men 
in hall or court, not one must show her face, 
but go on with her weaving.” 
The old woman 
nodded and kept still. She disappeared 
into the women’s hall, bolting the door behind her. 
Philoitios left the house now at one bound, 
catlike, running to bolt the courtyard gate. 
A coil of deck-rope of papyrus fiber 
lay in the gateway; this he used for lashing, 
and ran back to the same stool as before, 
fastening his eyes upon Odysseus. 
And Odysseus took his time, 
turning the bow, tapping it, every inch, 
for borings that termites might have made 
while the master of the weapon was abroad. 
The suitors were now watching him, and some 
jested among themselves: 
“A bow lover!” 
“Dealer in old bows!” 
“Maybe he has one like it 
at home!” 
“Or has an itch to make one for himself.” 
“See how he handles it, the sly old buzzard!” 
And one disdainful suitor added this: 
“May his fortune grow an inch for every inch he bends it!” 
But the man skilled in all ways of contending, 
satisfied by the great bow’s look and heft, 
like a musician, like a harper, when 
with quiet hand upon his instrument 
he draws between his thumb and forefinger 
a sweet new string upon a peg: so effortlessly 
Odysseus in one motion strung the bow. 
Then slid his right hand down the cord and plucked it, 
so the taut gut vibrating hummed and sang 
a swallow’s note. 
In the hushed hall it smote the suitors 
and all their faces changed. Then Zeus thundered 
overhead, one loud crack for a sign. 
And Odysseus laughed within him that the son 
of crooked-minded Kronos had flung that omen down. 
He picked one ready arrow from his table 
where it lay bare: the rest were waiting still 
in the quiver for the young men’s turn to come. 
He nocked it, let it rest across the handgrip, 
and drew the string and grooved butt of the arrow, 
aiming from where he sat upon the stool. 
Now flashed 
arrow from twanging bow clean as a whistle 
through every socket ring, and grazed not one, 
to thud with heavy brazen head beyond. 
Then quietly 
Odysseus said: 
“Telémakhos, the stranger 
you welcomed in your hall has not disgraced you. 
I did not miss, neither did I take all day 
stringing the bow. My hand and eye are sound, 
not so contemptible as the young men say. 
The hour has come to cook their lordships’ mutton— 
supper by daylight. Other amusements later, 
with song and harping that adorn a feast.” 
He dropped his eyes and nodded, and the prince 
Telémakhos, true son of King Odysseus, 
belted his sword on, clapped hand to his spear, 
and with a clink and glitter of keen bronze 
stood by his chair, in the forefront near his father. 


BOOK 22

Now shrugging off his rags the wiliest fighter of the islands leapt and 
stood on the broad door sill, his own bow in his hand. 
He poured out at his feet a rain of arrows from the quiver and spoke 
to the crowd: 
“So much for that. Your clean-cut game is over. 
Now watch me hit a target that no man has hit before, 
if I can make this shot. Help me, Apollo.” 
He drew to his fist the cruel head of an arrow for Antinods 
just as the young man leaned to lift his beautiful drinking cup, 
embossed, two-handled, golden: the cup was in his fingers: 
the wine was even at his lips: and did he dream of death? 
How could he? In that revelry amid his throng of friends 
who would imagine a single foe—though a strong foe indeed— 
could dare to bring death’s pain on him and darkness on his 
eyes? 
Odysseus’ arrow hit him under the chin 
and punched up to the feathers through his throat. 
Backward and down he went, letting the winecup fall 
from his shocked hand. Like pipes his nostrils jetted 
crimson runnels, a river of mortal red, 
and one last kick upset his table 
knocking the bread and meat to soak in dusty blood. 
Now as they craned to see their champion where he lay 
the suitors jostled in uproar down the hall, 
everyone on his feet. Wildly they turned and scanned 
the walls in the long room for arms; but not a shield, 
not a good ashen spear was there for a man to take and throw. 
All they could do was yell in outrage at Odysseus: 
“Foul! to shoot at a man! That was your last shot!” 
“Your own throat will be slit for this!” 
“Our finest lad is down! 
You killed the best on Ithaka.” 
“Buzzards will tear your eyes out!” 
For they imagined as they wished—that it was a wild shot, 
an unintended killing—fools, not to comprehend 
they were already in the grip of death. 
But glaring under his brows Odysseus answered: 
“You yellow dogs, you thought I’d never make it 
home from the land of Troy. You took my house to plunder, 
twisted my maids to serve your beds. You dared 
bid for my wife while I was still alive. 
Contempt was all you had for the gods who rule wide heaven, 
contempt for what men say of you hereafter. 
Your last hour has come. You die in blood.” 
As they all took this in, sickly green fear 
pulled at their entrails, and their eyes flickered 
looking for some hatch or hideaway from death. 
Eurymakhos alone could speak. He said: 
“If you are Odysseus of Ithaka come back, 
all that you say these men have done is true. 
Rash actions, many here, more in the countryside. 
But here he lies, the man who caused them all. 
Antinoos was the ringleader; he whipped us on 
to do these things. He cared less for a marriage 
than for the power Kronion has denied him 
as king of Ithaka. For that 
he tried to trap your son and would have killed him. 
He is dead now and has his portion. Spare 
your own people. As for ourselves, we’ll make 
restitution of wine and meat consumed, 
and add, each one, a tithe of twenty oxen 
with gifts of bronze and gold to warm your heart. 
Meanwhile we cannot blame you for your anger.” 
Odysseus glowered under his black brows 
and said: 
“Not for the whole treasure of your fathers, 
all you enjoy, lands, flocks, or any gold 
put up by others, would I hold my hand. 
There will be killing till the score is paid. 
You forced yourselves upon this house. Fight your way out, 
or run for it, if you think you'll escape death. 
I doubt one man of you skins by.” 
They felt their knees fail, and their hearts—but heard 
Eurymakhos for the last time rallying them. 
“Friends,” he said, “the man is implacable. 
Now that he’s got his hands on bow and quiver 
he’ll shoot from the big door stone there 
until he kills us to the last man. 
Fight, I say, 
let’s remember the joy of it. Swords out! 
Hold up your tables to deflect his arrows. 
After me, everyone: rush him where he stands. 
If we can budge him from the door, if we can pass 
into the town, we’ll call out men to chase him. 
This fellow with his bow will shoot no more.” 
He drew his own sword as he spoke, a broadsword of fine 
bronze, 
honed like a razor on either edge. Then crying hoarse and 
loud 
he hurled himself at Odysseus. But the kingly man let fly 
an arrow at that instant, and the quivering feathered butt 
sprang to the nipple of his breast as the barb stuck in his 
liver. 
The bright broadsword clanged down. He lurched and fell 
aside, 
pitching across his table. His cup, his bread and meat, 
were spilt and scattered far and wide, and his head slammed 
on the ground. 
Revulsion, anguish in his heart, with both feet kicking out, 
he downed his chair, while the shrouding wave of mist closed 
on his eyes. 
Amphinomos now came running at Odysseus, 
broadsword naked in his hand. He thought to make 
the great soldier give way at the door. 
But with a spear throw from behind Telémakhos hit him 
between the shoulders, and the lancehead drove 
clear through his chest. He left his feet and fell 
forward, thudding, forehead against the ground. 
Telémakhos swerved around him, leaving the long dark spear 
planted in Amphinomos. If he paused to yank it out 
someone might jump him from behind or cut him down with 
a sword 
at the moment he bent over. So he ran—ran from the tables 
to his father’s side and halted, panting, saying: 
“Father let me bring you a shield and spear, 
, a pair of spears, a helmet. 
I can arm on the run myself; I'll give 
, outfits to Eumaios and this cowherd. 
Better to have equipment.” 
Said Odysseus: 
“Run then, while I hold them off with arrows 
as long as the arrows last. When all are gone 
if Pm alone they can dislodge me.” 
Quick 
upon his father’s word Telémakhos 
ran to the room where spears and armor lay. 
He caught up four light shields, four pairs of spears, 
four helms of war high-plumed with flowing manes, 
and ran back, loaded down, to his father’s side. 
He was the first to pull a helmet on 
and slide his bare arm in a buckler strap. 
The servants armed themselves, and all three took their stand 
beside the master of battle. 
While he had arrows 
he aimed and shot, and every shot brought down 
one of his huddling enemies. 
But when all barbs had flown from the bowman’s fist, 
he leaned his bow in the bright entry way 
beside the door, and armed: a four-ply shield 
hard on his shoulder, and a crested helm, 
horsetailed, nodding stormy upon his head, 
then took his tough and bronze-shod spears. 
The suitors 
who held their feet, no longer under bowshot, 
could see a window high in a recess of the wall, 
a vent, lighting the passage to the storeroom. 
This passage had one entry, with a door, 
at the edge of the great hall’s threshold, just outside. 
Odysseus told the swineherd to stand over 
and guard this door and passage. As he did so, 
a suitor named Agelaos asked the others: 
“Who will get a leg up on that window 
and run to alarm the town? One sharp attack 
and this fellow will never shoot again.” 
His answer 
came from the goatherd, Melanthios: 
“No chance, my lord. 
The exit into the courtyard is too near them, 
too narrow. One good man could hold that portal 
against a crowd. No: let me scale the wall 
and bring your arms out of the storage chamber. 
Odysseus and his son put them indoors, 
I’m sure of it; not outside.” 
The goatish goatherd 
clambered up the wall, toes in the chinks, 
and slipped through to the storeroom. Twelve light shields, 
twelve spears he took, and twelve thick-crested helms, 
and handed all down quickly to the suitors. 
Odysseus, when he saw his adversaries 
girded and capped and long spears in their hands 
shaken at him, felt his knees go slack, 
his heart sink, for the fight was turning grim. 
He spoke rapidly to his son: 
“Telémakhos, one of the serving women 
is tipping the scales against us in this fight, 
or maybe Melanthios.” 
But sharp and clear 
Telémakhos said: 
“It is my own fault, Father, 
mine alone. The storeroom door—I left it 
wide open. They were more alert than I. 
Eumaios, go and lock that door, 
and bring back word if a woman is doing this 
or Melanthios, Dolios’ son. More likely he.” 
Even as they conferred, Melanthios 
entered the storeroom for a second load, 
and the swineherd at the passage entry saw him. 
He cried out to his lord: 
“Son of Laértés, 
Odysseus, master mariner and soldier, 
there he goes, the monkey, as we thought, 
there he goes into the storeroom. 
Let me hear your will: 
put a spear through him—I hope I am the stronger— 
or drag him here to pay for his foul tricks 
against your house?” 
Odysseus said: 
“Telémakhos and I 
will keep these gentlemen in hall, for all their urge to leave. 
You two go throw him into the storeroom, wrench his arms 
and legs behind him, lash his hands and feet 
to a plank, and hoist him up to the roof beams. 
Let him live on there suffering at his leisure.” 
The two men heard him with appreciation 
and ducked into the passage. Melanthios, 
rummaging in the chamber, could not hear them 
as they came up; nor could he see them freeze 
like posts on either side the door. 
He turned back with a handsome crested helmet 
in one hand, in the other an old shield 
coated with dust—a shield Laértés bore 
soldiering in his youth. It had lain there for years, 
and the seams on strap and grip had rotted away. 
As Melanthios came out the two men sprang, 
jerked him backward by the hair, and threw him. 
Hands and feet they tied with a cutting cord 
behind him, so his bones ground in their sockets, 
just as Laértés’ royal son commanded. 
Then with a whip of rope they hoisted him 
in agony up a pillar to the beams, 
and—O my swineherd—you were the one to say: 
“Watch through the night up there, Melanthios. 
An airy bed is what you need. 
You'll be awake to see the primrose Dawn 
when she goes glowing from the streams of Ocean 
to mount her golden throne. 
No oversleeping 
the hour for driving goats to feed the suitors.” 
They stooped for helm and shield and left him there 
contorted, in his brutal sling, 
and shut the doors, and went to join Odysseus, 
whose mind moved through the combat now to come. 
Breathing deep, and snorting hard, they stood 
four at the entry, facing two score men. 
But now into the gracious doorway stepped 
Zeus’s daughter Athena. She wore the guise of Mentor, 
and Odysseus appealed to her in joy: 
“O Mentor, join me in this fight! Remember 
how all my life I’ve been devoted to you, 
friend of my youth!” 
For he guessed it was Athena, 
Hope of Soldiers. Cries came from the suitors, 
and Agelaos, Damastor’s son, called out: 
“Mentor, don’t let Odysseus lead you astray 
to fight against us on his side. 
Think twice: we are resolved—and we will do it— 
after we kill them, father and son, 
you too will have your throat slit for your pains 
if you make trouble for us here. It means your life. 
Your life—and cutting throats will not be all. 
Whatever wealth you have, at home, or elsewhere, 
we'll mingle with Odysseus’ wealth. Your sons 
will be turned out, your wife and daughters 
banished from the town of Ithaka.” 
Athena’s anger grew like a storm wind as he spoke 
until she flashed out at Odysseus: 
“Ah, what a falling off! 
Where is your valor, where is the iron hand 
that fought at Troy for Helen, pearl of kings, 
no respite and nine years of war? How many foes 
your hand brought down in bloody play of spears? 
What stratagem but yours took Priam’s town? 
How is it now that on your own door sill, 
before the harriers of your wife, you curse your luck 
not to be stronger? 
Come here, cousin, stand by me, 
and you'll see action! In the enemies’ teeth 
learn how Mentor, son of Alkimos, 
repays fair dealing!” 
For all her fighting words 
she gave no overpowering aid—not yet; 
father and son must prove their mettle still. 
Into the smoky air under the roof 
the goddess merely darted to perch on a blackened beam— 
no figure to be seen now but a swallow. 
Command of the suitors had fallen to Agelaos. 
With him were Eurynomos, Amphimedon, 
Demoptélemos, Peisandros, Pélybos, 
the best of the lot who stood to fight for their lives 
after the streaking arrows downed the rest. 
Agelaos rallied them with his plan of battle: 
“Friends, our killer has come to the end of his rope, 
and much good Mentor did him, that blowhard, dropping in. 
Look, only four are left to fight, in the light there at the door. 
No scattering of shots, men, no throwing away good spears; 
we six will aim a volley at Odysseus alone, 
and may Zeus grant us the glory of a hit. 
If he goes down, the others are no problem.” 
At his command, then, “Ho!” they all let fly 
as one man. But Athena spoiled their shots. 
One hit the doorpost of the hall, another 
stuck in the door’s thick timbering, still others 
rang on the stone wall, shivering hafts of ash. 
Seeing his men unscathed, royal Odysseus 
gave the word for action. 
“Now I say, friends, 
the time is overdue to let them have it. 
Battlespoil they want from our dead bodies 
to add to all they plundered here before.” 
Taking aim over the steadied lanceheads 
they all let fly together. Odysseus killed 
Demoptélemos; Telémakhos 
killed Euryades; the swineherd, Elatos; 
and Peisandros went down before the cowherd. 
As these lay dying, biting the central floor, 
their friends gave way and broke for the inner wall. 
The four attackers followed up with a rush 
to take spears from the fallen men. 
Re-forming, 
the suitors threw again with all their strength, 
but Athena turned their shots, or all but two. 
One hit a doorpost in the hall, another 
stuck in the door’s thick timbering, still others 
rang on the stone wall, shivering hafts of ash. 
Amphimedon’s point bloodied Telémakhos’ 
wrist, a superficial wound, and Ktésippos’ 
long spear passing over Eumaios’ shield 
grazed his shoulder, hurtled on and fell. 
No matter: with Odysseus the great soldier 
the wounded threw again. And Odysseus raider of cities 
struck Eurydamas down. Telémakhos 
hit Amphimedon, and the swineherd’s shot 
killed Pélybos. But Ktésippos, who had last evening thrown 
a cow’s hoof at Odysseus, got the cowherd’s heavy cast 
full in the chest—and dying heard him say: 
“You arrogant joking bastard! 
Clown, will you, like a fool, and parade your wit? 
Leave jesting to the gods who do it better. 
This will repay your cow’s-foot courtesy 
to a great wanderer come home.” 
The master 
of the black herds had answered Ktésippos. 
Odysseus, lunging at close quarters, put a spear 
through Agelaos, Damastor’s son. Telémakhos 
hit Leókritos from behind and pierced him, 
kidney to diaphragm. Speared off his feet, 
he fell face downward on the ground. 
At this moment that unmanning thunder cloud, 
the aegis, Athena’s shield, 
took form aloft in the great hall. 
And the suitors mad with fear 
at her great sign stampeded like stung cattle by a river 
when the dread shimmering gadfly strikes in summer, 
in the flowering season, in the long-drawn days. 
After them the attackers wheeled, as terrible as falcons 
from eyries in the mountains veering over and diving down 
with talons wide unsheathed on flights of birds, 
who cower down the sky in chutes and bursts along the 
valley— 
but the pouncing falcons grip their prey, no frantic wing 
avails, 
and farmers love to watch those beakéd hunters. 
So these now fell upon the suitors in that hall, 
turning, turning to strike and strike again, 
while torn men moaned at death, and blood ran smoking 
over the whole floor. 
Now there was one 
who turned and threw himself at Odysseus’ knees— 
Ledédés, begging for his life: 
“Mercy, 
mercy on a suppliant, Odysseus! 
Never by word or act of mine, I swear, 
was any woman troubled here. I told the rest 
to put an end to it. They would not listen, 
would not keep their hands from brutishness, 
and now they are all dying like dogs for it. 
I had no part in what they did: my part 
was visionary—reading the smoke of sacrifice. 
Scruples go unrewarded if I die.” 
The shrewd fighter frowned over him and said: 
“You were diviner to this crowd? How often 
you must have prayed my sweet day of return 
would never come, or not for years!—and prayed 
to have my dear wife, and beget children on her. 
No plea like yours could save you 
from this hard bed of death. Death it shall be!” 
He picked up Agelaos’ broadsword 
from where it lay, flung by the slain man, 
and gave Leddés’ neck a lopping blow 
so that his head went down to mouth in dust. 
One more who had avoided furious death 
was the son of Terpis, Phemios, the minstrel, 
singer by compulsion to the suitors. 
He stood now with his harp, holy and clear, 
in the wall’s recess, under the window, wondering 
if he should flee that way to the courtyard altar, 
sanctuary of Zeus, the Enclosure God. 
Thighbones in hundreds had been offered there 
by Laértés and Odysseus. No, he thought; 
the more direct way would be best—to go 
humbly to his lord. But first to save 
his murmuring instrument he laid it down 
carefully between the winebowl and a chair, 
then he betook himself to Lord Odysseus, 
clung hard to his knees, and said: 
“Mercy, 
mercy on a suppliant, Odysseus! 
My gift is song for men and for the gods undying. 
My death will be remorse for you hereafter. 
No one taught me: deep in my mind a god 
shaped all the various ways of life in song. 
And I am fit to make verse in your company 
as in the god’s. Put aside lust for blood. 
Your own dear son Telémakhos can tell you, 
never by my own will or for love 
did I feast here or sing amid the suitors. 
They were too strong, too many; they compelled me.” 
Telémakhos in the elation of battle 
heard him. He at once called to his father: 
“Wait: that one is innocent: don’t hurt him. 
And we should let our herald live—Medn; 
he cared for me from boyhood. Where is he? 
Has he been killed already by Philoitios 
or by the swineherd? Else he got an arrow 
in that first gale of bowshots down the room.” 
Now this came to the ears of prudent Medon 
under the chair where he had gone to earth, 
pulling a new-flayed bull’s hide over him. 
Quiet he lay while blinding death passed by. 
Now heaving out from under 
he scrambled for Telémakhos’ knees and said: 
“Here I am, dear prince; but rest your spear! 
Tell your great father not to see in me 
a suitor for the sword’s edge—one of those 
who laughed at you and ruined his property!” 
The lord of all the tricks of war surveyed 
this fugitive and smiled. He said: 
“Courage: my son has dug you out and saved you. 
Take it to heart, and pass the word along: 
fair dealing brings more profit in the end. 
Now leave this room. Go and sit down outdoors 
where there’s no carnage, in the court, 
you and the poet with his many voices, 
while I attend to certain chores inside.” 
At this the two men stirred and picked their way 
to the door and out, and sat down at the altar, 
looking around with wincing eyes 
as though the sword’s edge hovered still. 
And Odysseus looked around him, narrow-eyed, 
for any others who had lain hidden 
while death’s black fury passed. 
In blood and dust 
he saw that crowd all fallen, many and many slain. 
Think of a catch that fishermen haul in to a halfmoon bay 
in a fine-meshed net from the white-caps of the sea: 
how all are poured out on the sand, in throes for the salt sea, 
twitching their cold lives away in Hélios’ fiery air: 
so lay the suitors heaped on one another. 
Odysseus at length said to his son: 
“Go tell old Nurse Pll have a word with her. 
What’s to be done now weighs on my mind.” 
Telémakhos knocked at the women’s door and called: 
“Eurykleia, come out here! Move, old woman. 
You kept your eye on all our servant girls. 
Jump, my father is here and wants to see you.” 
His call brought no reply, only the doors 
were opened, and she came. Telémakhos 
led her forward. In the shadowy hall 
full of dead men she found his father 
spattered and caked with blood like a mountain lion 
when he has gorged upon an ox, his kill— 
with hot blood glistening over his whole chest, 
smeared on his jaws, baleful and terrifying— 
even so encrimsoned was Odysseus 
up to his thighs and armpits. As she gazed 
from all the corpses to the bloody man 
she raised her head to cry over his triumph, 
but felt his grip upon her, checking her. 
Said the great soldier then: 
“Rejoice 
inwardly. No crowing aloud, old woman. 
To glory over slain men is no piety. 
Destiny and the gods’ will vanquished these, 
and their own hardness. They respected no one, 
good or bad, who came their way. 
For this, and folly, a bad end befell them. 
Your part is now to tell me of the women, 
those who dishonored me, and the innocent.” 
His own old nurse Eurykleia said: 
“T will, then. 
Child, you know you'll have the truth from me. 
Fifty all told they are, your female slaves, 
trained by your lady and myself in service, 
wool carding and the rest of it, and taught 
to be submissive. Twelve went bad, 
flouting me, flouting Penélopé, too. 
Telémakhos being barely grown, his mother 
would never let him rule the serving women— 
but you must let me go to her lighted rooms 
and tell her. Some god sent her a drift of sleep.” 
But in reply the great tactician said: 
“Not yet. Do not awake her. Tell those women 
who were the suitors’ harlots to come here.” 
She went back on this mission through his hall. 
Then he called Telémakhos to his side 
and the two herdsmen. Sharply Odysseus said: 
“These dead must be disposed of first of all. 
Direct the women. Tables and chairs will be 
scrubbed with sponges, rinsed and rinsed again. 
When our great room is fresh and put in order, 
take them outside, these women, 
between the roundhouse and the palisade, 
and hack them with your swordblades till you cut 
the life out of them, and every thought of sweet 
Aphrodite under the rutting suitors, 
when they lay down in secret.” 
As he spoke 
here came the women in a bunch, all wailing, 
soft tears on their cheeks. They fell to work 
to lug the corpses out into the courtyard 
under the gateway, propping one 
against another as Odysseus ordered, 
for he himself stood over them. In fear 
these women bore the cold weight of the dead. 
The next thing was to scrub off chairs and tables 
and rinse them down. Telémakhos and the herdsman 
scraped the packed earth floor with hoes, but made 
the women carry out all blood and mire. 
When the great room was cleaned up once again, 
at swordpoint they forced them out, between 
the roundhouse and the palisade, pell-mell 
to huddle in that dead end without exit. 
Telémakhos, who knew his mind, said curtly: 
“T would not give the clean death of a beast 
to trulls who made a mockery of my mother 
and of me too—you sluts, who lay with suitors.” 
He tied one end of a hawser to a pillar 
and passed the other about the roundhouse top, 
taking the slack up, so that no one’s toes 
could touch the ground. They would be hung like doves 
or larks in springés triggered in a thicket, 
where the birds think to rest—a cruel nesting. 
So now in turn each woman thrust her head 
into a noose and swung, yanked high in air, 
to perish there most piteously. 
Their feet danced for a little, but not long. 
From storeroom to the court they brought Melanthios, 
chopped with swords to cut his nose and ears off, 
pulled off his genitals to feed the dogs 
and raging hacked his hands and feet away. 
As their own hands and feet called for a washing, 
they went indoors to Odysseus again. 
Their work was done. He told Eurykleia: 
“Bring me 
brimstone and a brazier—medicinal 
fumes to purify my hall. Then tell 
Penelope to come, and bring her maids. 
All servants round the house must be called in.” 
His own old nurse Eurykleia replied: 
“Aye, surely that is well said, child. But let me 
find you a good clean shirt and cloak and dress you. 
You must not wrap your shoulders’ breadth again 
in rags in your own hall. That would be shameful.” 
Odysseus answered: 
“Let me have the fire. 
The first thing is to purify this place.” 
With no more chat Eurykleia obeyed 
and fetched out fire and brimstone. Cleansing fumes 
he sent through court and hall and storage chamber. 
Then the old woman hurried off again 
to the women’s quarters to announce her news, 
and all the servants came now, bearing torches 
in twilight, crowding to embrace Odysseus, 
taking his hands to kiss, his head and shoulders, 
while he stood there, nodding to every one, 
and overcome by longing and by tears. 


BOOK 23

The old nurse went upstairs exulting, 
with knees toiling, and patter of slapping feet, 
to tell the mistress of her lord’s return, 
and cried out by the lady’s pillow: 
“Wake, 
wake up, dear child! Penélopé, come down, 
see with your own eyes what all these years you longed for! 
Odysseus is here! Oh, in the end, he came! 
And he has killed your suitors, killed them all 
who made his house a bordel and ate his cattle 
and raised their hands against his son!” 
Penelope said: 
“Dear nurse ... the gods have touched you. 
They can put chaos into the clearest head 
or bring a lunatic down to earth. Good sense 
you always had. They’ve touched you. What is this 
mockery you wake me up to tell me, 
breaking in on my sweet spell of sleep? 
I had not dozed away so tranquilly 
since my lord went to war, on that ill wind 
to Ilion. 
Oh, leave me! Back down stairs! 
If any other of my women came in babbling 
things like these to startle me, I’d see her 
flogged out of the house! Your old age spares you that.” 
Eurykleia said: 
“Would I play such a trick on you, dear child? 
It is true, true, as I tell you, he has come! 
That stranger they were baiting was Odysseus. 
Telémakhos knew it days ago— 
cool head, never to give his father away, 
till he paid off those swollen dogs!” 
The lady in her heart’s joy now sprang up 
with sudden dazzling tears, and hugged the old one, 
crying out: 
“But try to make it clear! 
If he came home in secret, as you say, 
could he engage them singlehanded? How? 
They were all down there, still in the same crowd.” 
To this Eurykleia said: 
“I did not see it, 
I knew nothing; only I heard the groans 
of men dying. We sat still in the inner rooms 
holding our breath, and marvelling, shut in, 
until Telémakhos came to the door and called me— 
your own dear son, sent this time by his father! 
So I went out, and found Odysseus 
erect, with dead men littering the floor 
this way and that. If you had only seen him! 
It would have made your heart glow hot!—a lion 
splashed with mire and blood. 
But now the cold 
corpses are all gathered at the gate, 
and he has cleansed his hall with fire and brimstone, 
a great blaze. Then he sent me here to you. 
Come with me: you may both embark this time 
for happiness together, after pain, 
after long years. Here is your prayer, your passion, 
granted: your own lord lives, he is at home, 
he found you safe, he found his son. The suitors 
abused his house, but he has brought them down.” 
The attentive lady said: 
“Do not lose yourself 
in this rejoicing: wait: you know 
how splendid that return would be for us, 
how dear to me, dear to his son and mine; 
but no, it is not possible, your notion 
must be wrong. 
Some god has killed the suitors, 
a god, sick of their arrogance and brutal 
malice—for they honored no one living, 
good or bad, who ever came their way. 
Blind young fools, they’ve tasted death for it. 
But the true person of Odysseus? 
He lost his home, he died far from Akhaia.” 
The old nurse sighed: 
“How queer, the way you talk! 
Here he is, large as life, by his own fire, 
and you deny he ever will get home! 
Child, you always were mistrustful! 
But there is one sure mark that I can tell you: 
that scar left by the boar’s tusk long ago. 
I recognized it when I bathed his feet 
and would have told you, but he stopped my mouth, 
forbade me, in his craftiness. 
Come down, 
I stake my life on it, he’s here! 
Let me die in agony if I lie!” 
Penelope said: 
“Nurse dear, though you have your wits about you, 
still it is hard not to be taken in 
by the immortals. Let us join my son, though, 
and see the dead and that strange one who killed them.” 
She turned then to descend the stair, her heart 
in tumult. Had she better keep her distance 
and question him, her husband? Should she run 
up to him, take his hands, kiss him now? 
Crossing the door sill she sat down at once 
in firelight, against the nearest wall, 
across the room from the lord Odysseus. 
There 
leaning against a pillar, sat the man 
and never lifted up his eyes, but only waited 
for what his wife would say when she had seen him. 
And she, for a long time, sat deathly still 
in wonderment—for sometimes as she gazed 
she found him—yes, clearly—like her husband, 
but sometimes blood and rags were all she saw. 
Telémakhos’ voice came to her ears: 
“Mother, 
cruel mother, do you feel nothing, 
drawing yourself apart this way from Father? 
Will you not sit with him and talk and question him? 
What other woman could remain so cold? 
Who shuns her lord, and he come back to her 
from wars and wandering, after twenty years? 
Your heart is hard as flint and never changes!” 
Penélopé answered: 
“I am stunned, child. 
I cannot speak to him. I cannot question him. 
I cannot keep my eyes upon his face. 
If really he is Odysseus, truly home, 
beyond all doubt we two shall know each other 
better than you or anyone. There are 
secret signs we know, we two.” 
A smile 
came now to the lips of the patient hero, Odysseus, 
who turned to Telémakhos and said: 
“Peace: let your mother test me at her leisure. 
Before long she will see and know me best. 
These tatters, dirt—all that I’m caked with now— 
make her look hard at me and doubt me still. 
As to this massacre, we must see the end. 
Whoever kills one citizen, you know, 
and has no force of armed men at his back, 
had better take himself abroad by night 
and leave his kin. Well, we cut down the flower of Ithaka, 
the mainstay of the town. Consider that.” 
Telémakhos replied respectfully: 
“Dear Father, 
enough that you yourself study the danger, 
foresighted in combat as you are, 
they say you have no rival. 
We three stand 
ready to follow you and fight. I say 
for what our strength avails, we have the courage.” 
And the great tactician, Odysseus, answered: 
“Good. 
Here is our best maneuver, as I see it: 
bathe, you three, and put fresh clothing on, 
order the women to adorn themselves, 
and let our admirable harper choose a tune 
for dancing, some lighthearted air, and strum it. 
Anyone going by, or any neighbor, 
will think it is a wedding feast he hears. 
These deaths must not be cried about the town 
till we can slip away to our own woods. We’ll see 
what weapon, then, Zeus puts into our hands.” 
They listened attentively, and did his bidding, 
bathed and dressed afresh; and all the maids 
adorned themselves. Then Phémios the harper 
took his polished shell and plucked the strings, 
moving the company to desire 
for singing, for the sway and beat of dancing, 
until they made the manor hall resound 
with gaiety of men and grace of women. 
Anyone passing on the road would say: 
“Married at last, I see—the queen so many courted. 
Sly, cattish wife! She would not keep—not she!— 
the lord’s estate until he came.” 
So travellers’ 
thoughts might run—but no one guessed the truth. 
Greathearted Odysseus, home at last, 
was being bathed now by Eurynome 
and rubbed with golden oil, and clothed again 
in a fresh tunic and a cloak. Athena 
lent him beauty, head to foot. She made him 
taller, and massive, too, with crisping hair 
in curls like petals of wild hyacinth 
but all red-golden. Think of gold infused 
on silver by a craftsman, whose fine art 
Hephaistos taught him, or Athena: one 
whose work moves to delight: just so she lavished 
beauty over Odysseus’ head and shoulders. 
He sat then in the same chair by the pillar, 
facing his silent wife, and said: 
“Strange woman, 
the immortals of Olympos made you hard, 
harder than any. Who else in the world 
would keep aloof as you do from her husband 
if he returned to her from years of trouble, 
cast on his own land in the twentieth year? 
Nurse, make up a bed for me to sleep on. 
Her heart is iron in her breast.” 
Penelope 
spoke to Odysseus now. She said: 
“Strange man, 
if man you are ... This is no pride on my part 
nor scorn for you—not even wonder, merely. 
I know so well how you—how he—appeared 
boarding the ship for Troy. But all the same ... 
Make up his bed for him, Eurykleia. 
Place it outside the bedchamber my lord 
built with his own hands. Pile the big bed 
with fleeces, rugs, and sheets of purest linen.” 
With this she tried him to the breaking point, 
and he turned on her in a flash raging: 
“Woman, by heaven you’ve stung me now! 
Who dared to move my bed? 
No builder had the skill for that—unless 
a god came down to turn the trick. No mortal 
in his best days could budge it with a crowbar. 
There is our pact and pledge, our secret sign, 
built into that bed—my handiwork 
and no one else’s! 
An old trunk of olive 
grew like a pillar on the building plot, 
and I laid out our bedroom round that tree, 
lined up the stone walls, built the walls and roof, 
gave it a doorway and smooth-fitting doors. 
Then I lopped off the silvery leaves and branches, 
hewed and shaped that stump from the roots up 
into a bedpost, drilled it, let it serve 
as model for the rest. I planed them all, 
inlaid them all with silver, gold and ivory, 
and stretched a bed between—a pliant web 
of oxhide thongs dyed crimson. 
There’s our sign! 
I know no more. Could someone else’s hand 
have sawn that trunk and dragged the frame away?” 
Their secret! as she heard it told, her knees 
grew tremulous and weak, her heart failed her. 
With eyes brimming tears she ran to him, 
throwing her arms around his neck, and kissed him, 
murmuring: 
“Do not rage at me, Odysseus! 
No one ever matched your caution! Think 
what difficulty the gods gave: they denied us 
life together in our prime and flowering years, 
kept us from crossing into age together. 
Forgive me, don’t be angry. I could not 
welcome you with love on sight! I armed myself 
long ago against the frauds of men, 
impostors who might come—and all those many 
whose underhanded ways bring evil on! 
Helen of Argos, daughter of Zeus and Leda, 
would she have joined the stranger, lain with him, 
if she had known her destiny? known the Akhaians 
in arms would bring her back to her own country? 
Surely a goddess moved her to adultery, 
her blood unchilled by war and evil coming, 
the years, the desolation; ours, too. 
But here and now, what sign could be so clear 
as this of our own bed? 
No other man has ever laid eyes on it— 
only my own slave, Aktoris, that my father 
sent with me as a gift—she kept our door. 
You make my stiff heart know that I am yours.” 
Now from his breast into his eyes the ache 
of longing mounted, and he wept at last, 
his dear wife, clear and faithful, in his arms, 
longed for 
as the sunwarmed earth is longed for by a swimmer 
spent in rough water where his ship went down 
under Poseidon’s blows, gale winds and tons of sea. 
Few men can keep alive through a big surf 
to crawl, clotted with brine, on kindly beaches 
in joy, in joy, knowing the abyss behind: 
and so she too rejoiced, her gaze upon her husband, 
her white arms round him pressed as though forever. 
The rose Dawn might have found them weeping still 
had not grey-eyed Athena slowed the night 
when night was most profound, and held the Dawn 
under the Ocean of the East. That glossy team, 
Firebright and Daybright, the Dawn’s horses 
that draw her heavenward for men—Athena 
stayed their harnessing. 
Then said Odysseus: 
“My dear, we have not won through to the end. 
One trial—I do not know how long—is left for me 
to see fulfilled. Teiresias’ ghost forewarned me 
the night I stood upon the shore of Death, asking 
about my friends’ homecoming and my own. 
But now the hour grows late, it is bed time, 
rest will be sweet for us; let us lie down.” 
To this Penelope replied: 
“That bed, 
that rest is yours whenever desire moves you, 
now the kind powers have brought you home at last. 
But as your thought has dwelt upon it, tell me: 
what is the trial you face? I must know soon; 
what does it matter if I learn tonight?” 
The teller of many stories said: 
“My strange one, 
must you again, and even now, 
urge me to talk? Here is a plodding tale; 
no charm in it, no relish in the telling. 
Teirésias told me I must take an oar 
and trudge the mainland, going from town to town, 
until I discover men who have never known 
the salt blue sea, nor flavor of salt meat— 
strangers to painted prows, to watercraft 
and oars like wings, dipping across the water. 
The moment of revelation he foretold 
was this, for you may share the prophecy: 
some traveller falling in with me will say: 
‘A winnowing fan, that on your shoulder, sir?’ 
There I must plant my oar, on the very spot, 
with burnt offerings to Poseidon of the Waters: 
a ram, a bull, a great buck boar. Thereafter 
when I come home again, I am to slay 
full hekatombs to the gods who own broad heaven, 
one by one. 
Then death will drift upon me 
from seaward, mild as air, mild as your hand, 
in my well-tended weariness of age, 
contented folk around me on our island. 
He said all this must come.” 
Penelope said: 
“If by the gods’ grace age at least is kind, 
we have that promise—trials will end in peace.” 
So he confided in her, and she answered. 
Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse together 
laid soft coverlets on the master’s bed, 
working in haste by torchlight. Eurykleia 
retired to her quarters for the night, 
and then Eurynome, as maid-in-waiting, 
lighted her lord and lady to their chamber 
with bright brands. 
She vanished. 
So they came 
into that bed so steadfast, loved of old, 
opening glad arms to one another. 
Telémakhos by now had hushed the dancing, 
hushed the women. In the darkened hall 
he and the cowherd and the swineherd slept. 
The royal pair mingled in love again 
and afterward lay revelling in stories: 
hers of the siege her beauty stood at home 
from arrogant suitors, crowding on her sight, 
and how they fed their courtship on his cattle, 
oxen and fat sheep, and drank up rivers 
of wine out of the vats. 
Odysseus told 
of what hard blows he had dealt out to others 
and of what blows he had taken—all that story. 
She could not close her eyes till all was told. 
His raid on the Phaiakia, first of all, 
then how he visited the Lotos Eaters, 
and what the Kyklops did, and how those shipmates, 
pitilessly devoured, were avenged. 
Then of his touching Aiolos’s isle 
and how that king refitted him for sailing 
to Ithaka; all vain: gales blew him back 
groaning over the fishcold sea. Then how 
he reached the Laistrygonians’ distant bay 
and how they smashed his ships and his companions. 
Kirke, then: of her deceits and magic, 
then of his voyage to the wide underworld 
of dark, the house of Death, and questioning 
Teiresias, Theban spirit. 
Dead companions, 
many, he saw there, and his mother, too. 
Of this he told his wife, and told how later 
he heard the choir of maddening Seirenes, 
coasted the Wandering Rocks, Kharybdis’ pool 
and the fiend Skylla who takes toll of men. 
Then how his shipmates killed Lord Hélios’ cattle 
and how Zeus thundering in towering heaven 
split their fast ship with his fuming bolt, 
so all hands perished. 
He alone survived, 
cast away on Kalypso’s isle, Ogygia. 
He told, then, how that nymph detained him there 
in her smooth caves, craving him for her husband, 
and how in her devoted lust she swore 
he should not die nor grow old, all his days, 
but he held out against her. 
Last of all 
what sea-toil brought him to the Phaiakians; 
their welcome; how they took him to their hearts 
and gave him passage to his own dear island 
with gifts of garments, gold and bronze ... 
Remembering, 
he drowsed over the story’s end. Sweet sleep 
relaxed his limbs and his care-burdened breast. 
Other affairs were in Athena’s keeping. 
Waiting until Odysseus had his pleasure 
of love and sleep, the grey-eyed one bestirred 
the fresh Dawn from her bed of paling Ocean 
to bring up daylight to her golden chair, 
and from his fleecy bed Odysseus 
arose. He said to Penelope: 
“My lady, 
what ordeals have we not endured! Here, waiting 
you had your grief, while my return dragged out— 
my hard adventures, pitting myself against 
the gods’ will, and Zeus, who pinned me down 
far from home. But now our life resumes: 
we’ve come together to our longed-for bed. 
Take care of what is left me in our house; 
as to the flocks that pack of wolves laid waste 
they’ll be replenished: scores Pll get on raids 
and other scores our island friends will give me 
till all the folds are full again. 
This day 
I’m off up country to the orchards. I must see 
my noble father, for he missed me sorely. 
And here is my command for you—a strict one, 
though you may need none, clever as you are. 
Word will get about as the sun goes higher 
of how I killed those lads. Go to your rooms 
on the upper floor, and take your women. Stay there 
with never a glance outside or a word to anyone.” 
Fitting cuirass and swordbelt to his shoulders, 
he woke his herdsmen, woke Telémakhos, 
ordering all in arms. They dressed quickly, 
and all in war gear sallied from the gate, 
led by Odysseus. 
Now it was broad day 
but these three men Athena hid in darkness, 
going before them swiftly from the town. 


BOOK 24

Meanwhile the suitors’ ghosts were called away 
by Hermes of Kyllene, bearing the golden wand 
with which he charms the eyes of men or wakens 
whom he wills. 
He waved them on, all squeaking 
as bats will in a cavern’s underworld, 
all flitting, flitting criss-cross in the dark 
if one falls and the rock-hung chain is broken. 
So with faint cries the shades trailed after Hermés, 
pure Deliverer. 
He led them down dank ways, 
over grey Ocean tides, the Snowy Rock, 
past shores of Dream and narrows of the sunset, 
in swift flight to where the Dead inhabit 
wastes of asphodel at the world’s end. 
Crossing the plain they met Akhilleus’ ghost, 
Patréklos and Antilokhos, then Aias, 
noblest of Danaans after Akhilleus 
in strength and beauty. Here the newly dead 
drifted together, whispering. Then came 
the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, 
in black pain forever, surrounded by men-at-arms 
who perished with him in Aigisthos’ hall. 
Akhilleus greeted him: 
“My lord Atreides, 
we held that Zeus who loves the play of lightning 
would give you length of glory, you were king 
over so great a host of soldiery 
before Troy, where we suffered, we Akhaians. 
But in the morning of your life 
you met that doom that no man born avoids. 
It should have found you in your day of victory, 
marshal of the army, in Troy country; 
then all Akhaia would have heaped your tomb 
and saved your honor for your son. Instead 
piteous death awaited you at home.” 
And Atreus’ son replied: 
“Fortunate hero, 
son of Peleus, godlike and glorious, 
at Troy you died, across the sea from Argos, 
and round you Trojan and Akhaian peers 
fought for your corpse and died. A dustcloud wrought 
by a whirlwind hid the greatness of you slain, 
minding no more the mastery of horses. 
All that day we might have toiled in battle 
had not a storm from Zeus broken it off. 
We carried you out of the field of war 
down to the ships and bathed your comely body 
with warm water and scented oil. We laid you 
upon your long bed, and our officers 
wept hot tears like rain and cropped their hair. 
Then hearing of it in the sea, your mother, Thetis, 
came with nereids of the grey wave crying 
unearthly lamentation over the water, 
and trembling gripped the Akhaians to the bone. 
They would have boarded ship that night and fled 
except for one man’s wisdom—venerable 
Nestor, proven counselor in the past. 
He stood and spoke to allay their fear: ‘Hold fast, 
sons of the Akhaians, lads of Argos. 
His mother it must be, with nymphs her sisters, 
come from the sea to mourn her son in death.’ 
Veteran hearts at this contained their dread 
while at your side the daughters of the ancient 
seagod wailed and wrapped ambrosial shrouding 
around you. 
Then we heard the Muses sing 
a threnody in nine immortal voices. 
No Argive there but wept, such keening rose 
from that one Muse who led the song. 
Now seven 
days and ten, seven nights and ten, we mourned you, 
we mortal men, with nymphs who know no death, 
before we gave you to the flame, slaughtering 
longhorned steers and fat sheep on your pyre. 
Dressed by the nereids and embalmed with honey, 
honey and unguent in the seething blaze, 
you turned to ash. And past the pyre Akhaia’s 
captains paraded in review, in arms, 
clattering chariot teams and infantry. 
Like a forest fire the flame roared on, and burned 
your flesh away. Next day at dawn, Akhilleus, 
we picked your pale bones from the char to keep 
in wine and oil. A golden amphora 
your mother gave for this—Hephaistos’ work, 
a gift from Dionysos. In that vase, 
Akhilleus, hero, lie your pale bones mixed 
with mild Patréklos’ bones, who died before you, 
and nearby lie the bones of Antilokhos, 
the one you cared for most of all companions 
after Patréklos. 
We of the Old Army, 
we who were spearmen, heaped a tomb for these 
upon a foreland over Hellé’s waters, 
to be a mark against the sky for voyagers 
in this generation and those to come. 
Your mother sought from the gods magnificent trophies 
and set them down midfield for our champions. Often 
at funeral games after the death of kings 
when you yourself contended, you’ve seen athletes 
cinch their belts when trophies went on view. 
But these things would have made you stare—the treasures 
Thetis on her silver-slippered feet 
brought to your games—for the gods held you dear. 
You perished, but your name will never die. 
It lives to keep all men in mind of honor 
forever, Akhilleus. 
As for myself, what joy 
is this, to have brought off the war? Foul death 
Zeus held in store for me at my coming home; 
Aigisthos and my vixen cut me down.” 
While they conversed, the Wayfinder came near, 
leading the shades of suitors overthrown 
by Lord Odysseus. The two souls of heroes 
advanced together, scrutinizing these. 
Then Agamemnon recognized Amphimedon, 
son of Melaneus-friends of his on Ithaka— 
and called out to him: 
“Amphimedon, 
what ruin brought you into this undergloom? 
All in a body, picked men, and so young? 
One could not better choose the kingdom’s pride. 
Were you at sea, aboard ship, and Poseidon 
blew up a dire wind and foundering waves, 
or cattle-raiding, were you, on the mainland, 
or in a fight for some stronghold, or women, 
when the foe hit you to your mortal hurt? 
Tell me, answer my question. Guest and friend 
I say Iam of yours—or do you not remember 
I visited your family there? I came 
with Prince Meneláos, urging Odysseus 
to join us in the great sea raid on Troy. 
One solid month we beat our way, breasting 
south sea and west, resolved to bring him round, 
the wily raider of cities.” 
The new shade said: 
“O glory of commanders, Agamemnon, 
all that you bring to mind I remember well. 
As for the sudden manner of our death 
Pll tell you of it clearly, first to last. 
After Odysseus had been gone for years 
we were all suitors of his queen. She never 
quite refused, nor went through with a marriage, 
hating it, ever bent on our defeat. 
Here is one of her tricks: she placed her loom, 
her big loom, out for weaving in her hall, 
and the fine warp of some vast fabric on it. 
We were attending her, and she said to us: 
‘Young men, my suitors, now my lord is dead, 
let me finish my weaving before I marry, 
or else my thread will have been spun in vain. 
This is a shroud I weave for Lord Laértés 
when cold Death comes to lay him on his bier. 
The country wives would hold me in dishonor 
if he, with all his fortune, lay unshrouded.’ 
We had men’s hearts; she touched them; we agreed. 
So every day she wove on the great loom— 
but every night by torchlight she unwove it, 
and so for three years she deceived the Akhaians. 
But when the seasons brought the fourth around, 
as long months waned, and the slow days were spent, 
one of her maids, who knew the secret, told us. 
We found her unraveling the splendid shroud, 
and then she had to finish, willy nilly— 
finish, and show the big loom woven tight 
from beam to beam with cloth. She washed the shrouding 
clean as sun or moonlight. 
Then, heaven knows 
from what quarter of the world, fatality 
brought in Odysseus to the swineherd’s wood 
far up the island. There his son went too 
when the black ship put him ashore from Pylos. 
The two together planned our death-trap. Down 
they came to the famous town—Telémakhos 
long in advance: we had to wait for Odysseus. 
The swineherd led him to the manor later 
in rags like a foul beggar, old and broken, 
propped on a stick. These tatters that he wore 
hid him so well that none of us could know him 
when he turned up, not even the older men. 
We jeered at him, took potshots at him, cursed him. 
Daylight and evening in his own great hall 
he bore it, patient as a stone. That night 
the mind of Zeus beyond the stormcloud stirred him 
with Telémakhos at hand to shift his arms 
from mégaron to storage room and lock it. 
Then he assigned his wife her part: next day 
she brought his bow and iron axeheads out 
to make a contest. Contest there was none; 
that move doomed us to slaughter. Not a man 
could bend the stiff bow to his will or string it, 
until it reached Odysseus. We shouted, 
‘Keep the royal bow from the beggar’s hands 
no matter how he begs!’ Only Telémakhos 
would not be denied. 
So the great soldier 
took his bow and bent it for the bowstring 
effortlessly. He drilled the axeheads clean, 
sprang, and decanted arrows on the door sill, 
glared, and drew again. This time he killed 
Antinos. 
There facing us he crouched 
and shot his bolts of groaning at us, brought us 
down like sheep. Then some god, his familiar, 
went into action with him round the hall, 
after us in a massacre. Men lay groaning, 
mortally wounded, and the floor smoked with blood. 
That was the way our death came, Agamemnon. 
Now in Odysseus’ hall untended still 
our bodies lie, unknown to friends or kinsmen 
who should have laid us out and washed our wounds 
free of the clotted blood, and mourned our passing. 
So much is due the dead.” 
But Agamémnon’s 
tall shade when he heard this cried aloud: 
“O fortunate Odysseus, master mariner 
and soldier, blessed son of old Laértés! 
The girl you brought home made a valiant wife! 
True to her husband’s honor and her own, 
Penelope, Ikarios’ faithful daughter! 
The very gods themselves will sing her story 
for men on earth—mistress of her own heart, 
Penelope! 
Tyndareus’ daughter waited, too—how differently! 
Klytaimnéstra, the adulteress, 
waited to stab her lord and king. That song 
will be forever hateful. A bad name 
she gave to womankind, even the best.” 
These were the things they said to one another 
under the rim of earth where Death is lord. 
Leaving the town, Odysseus and his men 
that morning reached Laértés’ garden lands, 
long since won by his toil from wilderness— 
his homestead, and the row of huts around it 
where fieldhands rested, ate and slept. Indoors 
he had an old slave woman, a Sikel, keeping 
house for him in his secluded age. 
Odysseus here took leave of his companions. 
“Go make yourselves at home inside,” he said. 
“Roast the best porker and prepare a meal. 
rll go to try my father. Will he know me? 
Can he imagine it, after twenty years?” 
He handed spear and shield to the two herdsmen, 
and in they went, Telémakhos too. Alone 
Odysseus walked the orchard rows and vines. 
He found no trace of Délios and his sons 
nor the other slaves—all being gone that day 
to clear a distant field, and drag the stones 
for a boundary wall. 
But on a well-banked plot 
Odysseus found his father in solitude 
spading the earth around a young fruit tree. 
He wore a tunic, patched and soiled, and leggings— 
oxhide patches, bound below his knees 
against the brambles; gauntlets on his hands 
and on his head a goatskin cowl of sorrow. 
This was the figure Prince Odysseus found— 
wasted by years, racked, bowed under grief. 
The son paused by a tall pear tree and wept, 
then inwardly debated: should he run 
forward and kiss his father, and pour out 
his tale of war, adventure, and return, 
or should he first interrogate him, test him? 
Better that way, he thought— 
first draw him out with sharp words, trouble him. 
His mind made up, he walked ahead. Laértés 
went on digging, head down, by the sapling, 
stamping the spade in. At his elbow then 
his son spoke out: 
“Old man, the orchard keeper 
you work for is no townsman. A good eye 
for growing things he has; there’s not a nurseling, 
fig tree, vine stock, olive tree or pear tree 
or garden bed uncared for on this farm. 
But I might add—don’t take offense—your own 
appearance could be tidier. Old age 
yes—but why the squalor, and rags to boot? 
It would not be for sloth, now, that your master 
leaves you in this condition; neither at all 
because there’s any baseness in your self. 
No, by your features, by the frame you have, 
a man might call you kingly, 
one who should bathe warm, sup well, and rest easy 
in age’s privilege. But tell me: 
who are your masters? whose fruit trees are these 
you tend here? Tell me if it’s true this island 
is Ithaka, as that fellow I fell in with 
told me on the road just now? He had 
a peg loose, that one: couldn’t say a word 
or listen when I asked about my friend, 
my Ithakan friend. I asked if he were alive 
or gone long since into the underworld. 
I can describe him if you care to hear it: 
I entertained the man in my own land 
when he turned up there on a journey; never 
had I a guest more welcome in my house. 
He claimed his stock was Ithakan: Laértés 
Arkeisiades, he said his father was. 
I took him home, treated him well, grew fond of him— 
though we had many guests—and gave him 
gifts in keeping with his quality: seven 
bars of measured gold, a silver winebowl 
filigreed with flowers, twelve light cloaks, 
twelve rugs, robes and tunics—not to mention 
his own choice of women trained in service, 
the four well-favored ones he wished to take.” 
His father’s eyes had filled with tears. He said: 
“You’ve come to that man’s island, right enough, 
but dangerous men and fools hold power now. 
You gave your gifts in vain. If you could find him 
here in Ithaka alive, he’d make 
return of gifts and hospitality, 
as custom is, when someone has been generous. 
But tell me accurately—how many years 
have now gone by since that man was your guest? 
your guest, my son—if he indeed existed— 
born to ill fortune as he was. Ah, far 
from those who loved him, far from his native land, 
in some sea-dingle fish have picked his bones, 
or else he made the vultures and wild beasts 
a trove ashore! His mother at his bier 
never bewailed him, nor did I, his father, 
nor did his admirable wife, Penélopé, 
who should have closed her husband’s eyes in death 
and cried aloud upon him as he lay. 
So much is due the dead. 
But speak out, tell me further: 
who are you, of what city and family? 
where have you moored the ship that brought you here, 
where is your admirable crew? Are you a peddler 
put ashore by the foreign ship you came on?” 
Again Odysseus had a fable ready. 
“Yes,” he said, “I can tell you all those things. 
I come from Rover’s Passage where my home is, 
and I’m King Allwoes’ only son. My name 
is Quarrelman. 
Heaven’s power in the westwind 
drove me this way from Sikania, 
off my course. My ship lies in a barren 
cove beyond the town there. As for Odysseus, 
now is the fifth year since he put to sea 
and left my homeland—bound for death, you say. 
Yet landbirds flying from starboard crossed his bow— 
a lucky augury. So we parted joyously, 
in hope of friendly days and gifts to come.” 
A cloud of pain had fallen on Laértés. 
Scooping up handfuls of the sunburnt dust 
he sifted it over his grey head, and groaned, 
and the groan went to the son’s heart. A twinge 
prickling up through his nostrils warned Odysseus 
he could not watch this any longer. 
He leaped and threw his arms around his father, 
kissed him, and said: 
“Oh, Father, I am he! 
Twenty years gone, and here I’ve come again 
to my own land! 
Hold back your tears! No grieving! 
I bring good news—though still we cannot rest. 
I killed the suitors to the last man! 
Outrage and injury have been avenged!” 
Laértés turned and found his voice to murmur: 
“If you are Odysseus, my son, come back, 
give me some proof, a sign to make me sure.” 
His son replied: 
“The scar then, first of all. 
Look, here the wild boar’s flashing tusk 
wounded me on Parnassos; do you see it? 
You and my mother made me go, that time, 
to visit Lord Autélykos, her father, 
for gifts he promised years before on Ithaka. 
Again—more proof—let’s say the trees you gave me 
on this revetted plot of orchard once. 
I was a small boy at your heels, wheedling 
amid the young trees, while you named each one. 
You gave me thirteen pear, ten apple trees, 
and forty fig trees. Fifty rows of vines 
were promised too, each one to bear in turn. 
Bunches of every hue would hang there ripening, 
weighed down by the god of summer days.” 
The old man’s knees failed him, his heart grew faint, 
recalling all that Odysseus calmly told. 
He clutched his son. Odysseus held him swooning 
until he got his breath back and his spirit 
and spoke again: 
“Zeus, Father! Gods above!— 
you still hold pure Olympos, if the suitors 
paid for their crimes indeed, and paid in blood! 
But now the fear is in me that all Ithaka 
will be upon us. They’ll send messengers 
to stir up every city of the islands.” 
Odysseus the great tactician answered: 
“Courage, and leave the worrying to me. 
We'll turn back to your homestead by the orchard. 
I sent the cowherd, swineherd, and Telémakhos 
ahead to make our noonday meal.” 
Conversing 
in this vein they went home, the two together, 
into the stone farmhouse. There Telémakhos 
and the two herdsmen were already carving 
roast young pork, and mixing amber wine. 
During these preparations the Sikel woman 
bathed Laértés and anointed him, 
and dressed him in a new cloak. Then Athena, 
standing by, filled out his limbs again, 
gave girth and stature to the old field captain 
fresh from the bathing place. His son looked on 
in wonder at the godlike bloom upon him, 
and called out happily: 
“Oh, Father, 
surely one of the gods who are young forever 
has made you magnificent before my eyes!” 
Clearheaded Laértés faced him, saying: 
“By Father Zeus, Athena and Apollo, 
I wish I could be now as once I was, 
commander of Kephallenians, when I took 
the walled town, Nérikos, on the promontory! 
Would god I had been young again last night 
with armor on me, standing in our hall 
to fight the suitors at your side! How many 
knees I could have crumpled, to your joy!” 
While son and father spoke, cowherd and swineherd 
attended, waiting, for the meal was ready. 
Soon they were all seated, and their hands 
picked up the meat and bread. 
But now old Dolios 
appeared in the bright doorway with his sons, 
work-stained from the field. Laértés’ housekeeper, 
who reared the boys and tended Dolios 
in his bent age, had gone to fetch them in. 
When it came over them who the stranger was 
they halted in astonishment. Odysseus 
hit an easy tone with them. Said he: 
“Sit down and help yourselves. Shake off your wonder. 
Here we’ve been waiting for you all this time, 
and our mouths watering for good roast pig!” 
But Délios came forward, arms outstretched, 
and kissed Odysseus’ hand at the wrist bone, 
crying out: 
“Dear master, you returned! 
You came to us again! How we had missed you! 
We thought you lost. The gods themselves have brought you! 
Welcome, welcome; health and blessings on you! 
And tell me, now, just one thing more: Penélopé, 
does she know yet that you are on the island? 
or should we send a messenger?” 
Odysseus gruffly said, 
“Old man, she knows. 
Is it for you to think of her?” 
So Dolios 
quietly took a smooth bench at the table 
and in their turn his sons welcomed Odysseus, 
kissing his hands; then each went to his chair 
beside his father. Thus our friends 
were occupied in Laértés’ house at noon. 
Meanwhile to the four quarters of the town 
the news ran: bloody death had caught the suitors; 
and men and women in a murmuring crowd 
gathered before Odysseus’ hall. They gave 
burial to the piteous dead, or bore 
the bodies of young men from other islands 
down to the port, thence to be ferried home. 
Then all the men went grieving to assembly 
and being seated, rank by rank, grew still, 
as old Eupeithes rose to address them. Pain 
lay in him like a brand for Antinods, 
the first man that Odysseus brought down, 
and tears flowed for his son as he began: 
“Heroic feats that fellow did for us 
Akhaians, friends! Good spearmen by the shipload 
he led to war and lost—lost ships and men, 
and once ashore again killed these, who were 
the islands’ pride. 
Up with you! After him!— 
before he can take flight to Pylos town 
or hide at Elis, under Epeian law! 
We'd be disgraced forever! Mocked for generations 
if we cannot avenge our sons’ blood, and our brothers’! 
Life would turn to ashes—at least for me; 
rather be dead and join the dead! 
I say 
we ought to follow now, or they’ll gain time 
and make the crossing.” 
His appeal, his tears, 
moved all the gentry listening there; 
but now they saw the crier and the minstrel 
come from Odysseus’ hall, where they had slept. 
The two men stood before the curious crowd, 
and Medôn said: 
“Now hear me, men of Ithaka. 
When these hard deeds were done by Lord Odysseus 
the immortal gods were not far off. I saw 
with my own eyes someone divine who fought 
beside him, in the shape and dress of Mentor; 
it was a god who shone before Odysseus, 
a god who swept the suitors down the hall 
dying in droves.” 
At this pale fear assailed them, 
and next they heard again the old forecaster, 
Halithérsés Mastoridés, Alone 
he saw the field of time, past and to come. 
In his anxiety for them he said: 
“Ithakans, now listen to what I say. 
Friends, by your own fault these deaths came to pass. 
You would not heed me nor the captain, Mentor; 
would not put down the riot of your sons. 
Heroic feats they did!—all wantonly 
raiding a great man’s flocks, dishonoring 
his queen, because they thought he’d come no more. 
Let matters rest; do as I urge; no chase, 
or he who wants a bloody end will find it.” 
The greater number stood up shouting “Aye!” 
But many held fast, sitting all together 
in no mind to agree with him. Eupeithes 
had won them to his side. They ran for arms, 
clapped on their bronze, and mustered 
under Eupeithes at the town gate 
for his mad foray. 
Vengeance would be his, 
he thought, for his son’s murder; but that day 
held bloody death for him and no return. 
At this point, querying Zeus, Athena said: 
“O Father of us all and king of kings, 
enlighten me. What is your secret will? 
War and battle, worse and more of it, 
or can you not impose a pact on both?” 
The summoner of cloud replied: 
“My child, 
why this formality of inquiry? 
Did you not plan that action by yourself— 
see to it that Odysseus, on his homecoming, 
should have their blood? 
Conclude it as you will. 
There is one proper way, if I may say so: 
Odysseus’ honor being satisfied, 
let him be king by a sworn pact forever, 
and we, for our part, will blot out the memory 
of sons and brothers slain. As in the old time 
let men of Ithaka henceforth be friends; 
prosperity enough, and peace attend them.” 
Athena needed no command, but down 
in one spring she descended from Olympos 
just as the company of Odysseus finished 
wheat crust and honeyed wine, and heard him say: 
“Go out, someone, and see if they are coming.” 
One of the boys went to the door as ordered 
and saw the townsmen in the lane. He turned 
swiftly to Odysseus. 
“Here they come,” 
he said, “best arm ourselves, and quickly.” 
All up at once, the men took helm and shield— 
four fighting men, counting Odysseus, 
with Dolios’ half dozen sons. Laértés 
armed as well, and so did Délios— 
greybeards, they could be fighters in a pinch. 
Fitting their plated helmets on their heads 
they sallied out, Odysseus in the lead. 
Now from the air Athena, Zeus’s daughter, 
appeared in Mentor’s guise, with Mentor’s voice, 
making Odysseus’ heart grow light. He said 
to put cheer in his son: 
“Telémakhos” 
you are going into battle against pikemen 
where hearts of men are tried. I count on you 
to bring no shame upon your forefathers. 
In fighting power we have excelled this lot 
in every generation.” 
Said his son: 
“If you are curious, Father, watch and see 
the stuff that’s in me. No more talk of shame.” 
And old Laértés cried aloud: 
“Ah, what a day for me, dear gods! 
to see my son and grandson vie in courage!” 
Athena halted near him, and her eyes 
shone like the sea. She said: 
“Arkeisiadés, 
dearest of all my old brothers-in-arms, 
invoke the grey-eyed one and Zeus her father, 
heft your spear and make your throw.” 
Power flowed into him from Pallas Athena, 
whom he invoked as Zeus’s virgin child, 
and he let fly his heavy spear. 
It struck 
Eupeithés on the cheek plate of his helmet, 
and undeflected the bronze head punched through. 
He toppled, and his armor clanged upon him. 
Odysseus and his son now furiously 
closed, laying on with broadswords, hand to hand, 
and pikes: they would have cut the enemy down 
to the last man, leaving not one survivor, 
had not Athena raised a shout 
that stopped all fighters in their tracks. 
“Now hold!” 
she cried, “Break off this bitter skirmish; 
end your bloodshed, Ithakans, and make peace.” 
Their faces paled with dread before Athena, 
and swords dropped from their hands unnerved, to lie 
strewing the ground, at the great voice of the goddess. 
Those from the town turned fleeing for their lives. 
But with a cry to freeze their hearts 
and ruffling like an eagle on the pounce, 
the lord Odysseus reared himself to follow— 
at which the son of Kronos dropped a thunderbolt 
smoking at his daughter’s feet. 
Athena 
cast a grey glance at her friend and said: 
“Son of Laértés and the gods of old, 
Odysseus, master of land ways and sea ways, 
command yourself. Call off this battle now, 
or Zeus who views the wide world may be angry.” 
He yielded to her, and his heart was glad. 
Both parties later swore to terms of peace 
set by their arbiter, Athena, daughter 
of Zeus who bears the stormcloud as a shield— 
though still she kept the form and voice of Mentor. 