Homer

The Odyssey

Peter Green



BOOK 1

The man, Muse-tell me about that resourceful man, who wandered far and wide, when he'd sacked Troy's sacred citadel:
many men's townships he saw, and learned their ways of thinking, many the griefs he suffered at heart on the open sea,
battling for his own life and his comrades' homecoming. Yet
no way could he save his comrades, much though he longed to- it was through their own blind recklessness that they perished, the fools, for they slaughtered the cattle of Helios the sun god and ate them: for that he took from them their day of returning.
Tell us this tale, goddess, child of Zeus; start anywhere in it!
Now the rest, all those who'd escaped from sheer destruction, were home by now, survivors of both warfare and the sea; Him alone, though longing for his homecoming and his wife, the queenly nymph Kalypso, bright among goddesses,
held back in her hollow cavern, desiring him for her husband.
But when the year arrived, with its circling seasons, in which the gods had ordained he should make his homeward journey to Itháke, not even then would he be free of trials,
even among his own people. All the gods felt pity for him
except for Poseidon, who still nursed unabated wrath
against godlike Odysseus until he reached his native land.
But now Poseidon was visiting the remote Aithiopians- who live in two sundered groups, both at mankind's frontiers, the one at Hyperion's setting, the other where he rises-
to receive from them a full sacrifice of bulls and rams,
and was sitting there at the feast, enjoying himself: the other gods were all assembled in the halls of Olympian Zeus.
Discussion was started among them by the Father of men and gods, who'd been brooding in his heart over handsomeAigisthos,
slain by far-famed Orestes, the son of Agamemnon:
with him in mind he now spoke among the immortals, saying: "My oh my, the way mortals will fasten blame on the gods!
From us, they say, evils come, yet they themselves through their own blind recklessness have ills beyond
their fated lot, as lately Aigisthos-beyond his fated lot-
killed Atreus' son at his homecoming, married his wife,
though he knew this meant sheer destruction, since we'd told him before the event, sending Hermes, the sharp-eyed Argos-slayer,
he should neither slay the man nor marry his bedfellow,
since vengeance for Atreus' son would come from Orestes
once he'd reached manhood, and longed for his own country. So Hermes said; but he failed, for all his good intentions,
to dissuade Aigisthos, who now has paid the full penalty."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Our father, son of Kronos, highest above all rulers,
that man indeed was destroyed by well-merited disaster- so may all others perish who commit such crimes!-
but my heart is distressed on account of clever Odysseus, that ill-fated man, who, far from his dear ones, has long
suffered griefs on a sea-ringed island, where the sea's navel is:
a tree-rich island, and a goddess has her home there,
the daughter of crafty-minded Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, who in person shoulders those lofty
pillars that keep earth and firmament apart from each other.
His daughter it is who detains that luckless, sorrowful man,
forever beguiling him with soft and wheedling words
to forget his island, Itháke. Yet Odysseus, in his yearning to perceive were it only the smoke rising up into the sky
from his homeland, longs now for death. But your own heart
cares nothing for him, Olympian! Did not Odysseus
by the Argives' ships honor you with the sacrifices he made in the broad land of Troy? Why, Zeus, do you hatehim so?"
Cloud-gatherer Zeus responded to her, saying: "My child, what's this word that's escaped the barrier of your teeth?
Now how could I ever forget the godlike Odysseus,
who for mind surpasses all mortals, who's sacrificed most to the deathless gods who possess the wide firmament? No,
it's Poseidon, the Earth-Shaker, whose fury with him is relentless, unceasing, because of the Kyklops, whose eye he blinded-
the godlike Polyphemos, whose strength is the mightiest
among all the Kyklopes: the nymph Thoosa bore him, daughter of Phorkys who rules the unharvested sea, for there in the hollow sea caves she lay with Poseidon.
That's why Earth-Shaker Poseidon is wroth with Odysseus:
not killing him, but forever frustrating his homeward journey.
So come, let all of us here give some thought to his return, how to get him home safely: 
Poseidon will have to abandon his rage, he won't be able, with all the immortals united against him, to strive alone, lacking the gods' goodwill."
The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Our father, son of Kronos, highest above all rulers, if indeed it is now agreeable to the blessed gods
that quick-witted Odysseus should return to his own home, let us then dispatch Hermes, the guide, the slayer of Argos,
to the isle of Ogygia, so that as soon as may be
he can inform the fair-tressed nymph of our firm decision on steadfast-minded Odysseus: that he's to return home. I meanwhile will go to Itháke, approach his son,
put more strength in his heart, give him the courage
to summon the long-haired Achaians to assembly, and make
a strong case to the suitors, who without cease slaughter
his flocks of sheep and his shambling, crumple-horned cattle; and then I'll send him to Sparta and sandy Pylos, to seek news of his father's homecoming-he may learn something-
and win a good reputation among men at large."
So she spoke,
and bound on her elegant sandals under her feet, immortal, golden, that bore her both over the sea
and across the boundless earth, as swift as the wind's blast; and she took her brave spear, so massive, thick and strong,
its tip of sharp bronze, with which she routs the ranks of men,
heroes against whom she, a strong sire's daughter, is wroth, and took off, down from the heights of Olympos, landing on Itháke, right before Odysseus' outer entrance,
his courtyard's threshold, still grasping the bronze spear,
in the guise of a stranger, the Taphian leader Mentes.
There she found the bold suitors. They at the time
were amusing themselves with board games out of doors, seated on hides of oxen they themselves had slaughtered, while heralds and henchmen were busy on their behalf,
some mixing wine and water for them in bowls,
while others were swabbing the tables with porous sponges and setting them out, or carving meat in lavish helpings.
By far the first to see her was godlike Telemachos,
who was sitting among the suitors, sorely vexed at heart,
in his mind's eye seeing his noble father, how he might
return, make a scattering of the suitors through his domain, and himself gain honor, be king of his own possessions.
Thinking thus, there among the suitors, he noticed Athene, and went at once to the forecourt, embarrassed at heart
that a guest had to wait outside. He stood beside her,
clasped her right hand, took charge of the bronze spear,
and addressed her with winged words, saying: "Greetings, stranger!
As a guest you're welcome among us, and afterwards, when you've shared our meal, then explain to us what it is you need."
That said, he led the way, and Pallas Athene followed.
When they entered the lofty house, Telemachos carried her spear across and stood it beside a tall pillar, in
a polished spear rack, where many more spears were standing, that belonged to steadfast Odysseus. Athene herself
he led and had sit down in a backed chair, spreading
a cloth on it first: a finely wrought chair, with footstool,
and beside it an inlaid seat for himself, away from the others, the suitors, lest his guest, irritated by their uproar,
should be put off his food, among such arrogant men-
and besides, he wanted to ask him about his absent father.
Then a handmaid brought water for them in an exquisite golden pitcher, poured it into a silver basin, so they
could rinse their hands, then set a polished table beside them, and a grave housekeeper brought them bread, and with it
appetizers galore, giving freely of what was to hand,
while a carver made up and sent them platefuls of meat
of every kind, and set by them golden goblets, while a herald went to and fro to furnish them with wine.
Then in came the arrogant suitors, and all immediately
settled themselves in rows on the seats and benches,
and heralds now poured water over their hands, while maids brought them bread by the basketful, and youths
filled the bowls to the brim with drink for them, and they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them.
But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
the suitors' minds now turned to other pleasures,
to singing and dancing, a feast's proper complement,
and a herald brought out for Phemios his well-tuned lyre- he sang for the suitors only because he was forced to-
and he struck a chord, introducing his own fine song.
But Telemachos now spoke to grey-eyed Athene, leaning his head close to hers, so that no one else could hear him: "Dear stranger, would you be shocked by what I tell you?
All these men care about is music and singing, easy enough
for them-they're freeloading off another man's livelihood,
a man whose white bones may be rotting in the rain away on the mainland, or rolled by the sea's breakers. If they were to see him, if he ever returned to Itháke,
they'd all be praying that they could run away faster, not
as now, that they were richer in gold and expensive clothes!
But no, he must have suffered a wretched fate, nor is there any comfort for us, not even should someone, somewhere, claim he'll come back: his day of returning's perished.
But now tell me this, and give me a truthful answer:
Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents?
On what kind of ship did you come here? How did sailors bring you to Itháke? What place do they say they're from? For I don't imagine you made your way here on foot!
And tell me this truly too, that I may be certain of it:
Is this your first visit here, or are you one of my father's
guest-friends? Many the men who used to visit our home, just as he too traveled widely among mankind."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "So, I'll answer the questions you asked me fully and truthfully.
I declare I am Mentes, wise Anchialos' son,
and that I rule the Taphians, master rowers; and now,
as you see, I've put in here by ship, with my companions, sailing the wine-dark deep to meet men of foreign speech,
on my way to Temése for copper, with a cargo of gleaming iron.
My ship's out there, by the countryside, far from the city,
in the harbor of Rheithron, down below wooded Neion. Guest-friends of each other Odysseus and I claim we are from way back-you can go ask that elderly hero Laërtes, who, they say, no longer comes to the city,
but far away in the backwoods has a hard existence with one old woman servant, who sees to his victuals and drink
when exhaustion steals over and weakens his limbs as he shuffles along the high slope of his patch of vineyard.
So now I've come, for indeed word had it that your father
was back home; but the gods must be thwarting his return, since not yet has he died in this world, the noble Odysseus,
but still lives, perhaps held prisoner, out on the vast deep in some sea-girt island, kept there by violent men,
wild savages, who, most likely, are holding him under duress.
But I shall now make a prediction for you, just as the immortals
put it into my mind-and I think it will come to pass, though I am no seer, have no clear knowledge of bird-signs! Not much longer will he be away from his own beloved country, no, not even if iron bonds restrain him-he'll
find a way to return, this man of many resources!
But now tell me this, and declare it to me truly,
if indeed, big as you are, you're Odysseus' own son-because your head and fine eyes bear an amazing resemblance
to his: many the hours we spent with one another
before he embarked for Troy, like so many others,
the finest of the Achaians, in the hollow ships, and set forth. But since then I've not seen Odysseus, nor he me."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"So, stranger, I'll give you a full and truthful answer.
My mother says I'm his child, but for my own part
I cannot tell: never yet did any man know his begetting! Indeed, I could wish I'd been the son of some fortunate gentleman, taken by age while among his own possessions!
But truth is, it was the most ill-fated of mortals who,
so they say, begot me-since you're asking about this matter."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "No nameless lineage, surely, did the gods decree for you hereafter, since such as you are you were born to Penelope!
But now tell me this, and declare it to me truly:
What party, what gathering's this? What's your concern with it?
A feast, is it? Or a wedding? No communal dinner, surely? The riotous, arrogant manner in which, as it seems to me,
they are carrying on in your house! A man might well take offense, walking in on this shameful behavior-any decent man, that is."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to her, saying:
"Since, stranger, you ask this, and question me on these matters, our household once looked to be rich and respectable,
so long as that certain man was here among his people;
but now the gods have willed otherwise, have planned misfortune,
have vanished him utterly, as they've done to no other man
ever-I wouldn't be grieving so over his death
had he fallen alongside his comrades upon Trojan soil or expired in his friends' arms after winding up the war!
Then all the Achaians would have made him a burial mound,
and great glory would have been his, and his son's, hereafter.
But now, ingloriously, the storm winds have swept him away.
He's gone, out of sight, out of knowledge, leaving me pain and sorrow
-and it's not on his sole account that I'm lamenting now, since the gods have inflicted other harsh troubles on me.
All those highborn leaders who lord it over the islands-
Doulichion and Same and forested Zákynthos, besides those who rule as princes over rocky Itháke-
are all paying court to my mother, and devouring our property.
Yet she neither refuses this hateful marriage, nor can she make
an end of the business, while they with feasting keep on
eating away our substance: very soon they'll destroy me too."
Outraged by his statement, Athene responded, saying: "It's true, you're in urgent need of the vanished Odysseus, to come and lay hands on these shameless suitors!
How I wish he'd appear now, here at your outer gate,
armed with helmet and shield and a brace of spears,
the way he was the first time I set eyes upon him,
in our house, drinking wine and enjoying himself, on his way
back from Ephyre, where he'd gone to see Ilos, Mermeros' son.
Odysseus had voyaged there aboard his speedy vessel
in search of a lethal poison that he wanted to get
to smear the bronze tips of his arrows. But Ilos refused
to give it him, fearing the wrath of the gods that are forever;
yet my father did, for he loved the man most dearly.
If only Odysseus might come, thus arrayed, among the suitors!
They'd all find a quick death then, and a bitter marriage.
But of course all this rests on the knees of the gods-
whether or not he'll return and exact full retribution
in his own halls. But I urge you yourself to consider
how you might drive out these suitors from your household,
so pay attention now, mark carefully what I tell you.
Tomorrow call an assembly of the Achaian heroes:
Speak your mind to them all, let the gods be your witnesses!
Tell the suitors all to disperse, to go back home;
And if your mother's heart is urging her toward marriage,
she should return to her powerful father's domain,
where they'll set up the wedding and arrange the bride-gifts,
lots of them, all that's fitting to go with a much-loved daughter.
And for you yourself wise advice, if you'll take it: man a ship,
the best you have, with twenty rowers, and go
to seek news of your father, who's been so long absent,
just in case some person can tell you, or you pick up a rumor
from Zeus, the most common way that mortals gather tidings.
Go first to Pylos, interrogate noble Nestor,
and from there to Sparta, to fair-haired Menelaös,
for he was the last of all the bronze-corseleted Achaians
to get home. If you hear that your father's alive, and on his
way back, then, though beleaguered, hold on for another year;
but if you get word that he's dead, no longer living,
then make your way back to your own dear country,
raise him a burial mound, perform funeral rites at it-
lavish ones, as is fitting-and find your mother a husband.
Then, when all this business is over and done with,
is the time to consider, in your mind and spirit,
how you might slaughter these suitors in your halls,
whether by guile or openly. It does not become you
to persist in childish ways: you're no longer a child.
Or have you not heard what glory noble Orestes won among all mankind when he slew his father's murderer,
crafty Aigisthos, for killing his famous father?
You too, my friend-for I see how handsome and tall you are- be valiant, that men yet unborn may speak well of you!
But now I shall go back down to my swift ship,
where my comrades must be waiting impatiently for me.
So think on these things, and pay heed to what I've told you."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to her, saying: "Stranger, the words that you said were spoken considerately, as a father would speak to his son: I will never forget them. But please do stay longer, though eager to be on your way,
so that when you've had a bath and refreshed your spirit
you can go to your ship with a present, happy at heart- an expensive and beautiful gift, to be an heirloom for you
from me, such as guest-friends exchange with one another."
The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Delay me no longer-I need to resume my journey:
and whatever gift your heart incites you to give me,
give it me when I return here, to take back home. And choose something really precious: it'll bring you its worth in exchange."
That said, the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, departed,
flying up through the skylight. Into his heart she set
courage and strength, and put him in mind of his father even more than before. Reflecting on what had happened his mind was in awe: this must be a god, he thought.
At once he approached the suitors, a godlike mortal.
For them the far-famed minstrel was singing, and they
sat listening in silence. His song recounted the Achaians' wretched homecoming from Troy, laid on them by Athene. From upstairs the marvelous tale was heard and pondered by Ikarios' daughter, the prudent Penelope, who now
went down from her high bright upper chamber: not
alone, for two of her handmaids followed in attendance. When she, bright among women, came where the suitors were, she stood by the central post of the snugly timbered roof, holding up her shining veil in front of her face,
and flanked on either side by a devoted handmaid,
and then, in tears, addressed the godlike minstrel:
"Phemios, much else you know to keep mortals spellbound- deeds of men and of gods, made famous by minstrels:
give them one such song as you sit here, let them in silence
still drink their wine, but quit this lay you're singing,
so unhappy, it always agonizes the heart in my breast, since on me beyond all others has come unforgettable
grief, for that much-loved being I picture with such longing- my husband, of wide renown through Hellas and mid-Argos."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to her, saying:
"Mother, why do you begrudge so excellent a minstrel the right to please in whatever way he chooses?
It's not minstrels who are at fault, but Zeus, who deals out to bread-eating mortals whatever he likes for each.
Don't blame this bard for singing the Danaäns' grim fate:
men always show most enthusiasm for the newest lay
that's performed with a view to enchant their listening ears! So harden your mind and heart, be resigned to listen:
It was not Odysseus alone who lost his day of returning
from Troy-many others perished, just as he did.
So go back to your room, get down to your regular tasks, at the loom, with the distaff; see to it that your handmaids
do their proper work too! But speechmaking is men's business, and mine above all, since mine is the power in this household."
Taken aback, Penelope now withdrew to her chamber,
and stored in her heart her son's smart observations. Upstairs she went, her handmaids with her, and then wept for Odysseus, her own dear husband, until
grey-eyed Athene spread sweet sleep over her eyelids.
But the suitors created an uproar throughout the shadowy hall,
each praying that he might be the one to bed and lie with her, and among them sagacious Telemachos was the first to speak: "You, my mother's suitors, domineering and arrogant,
for now let us feast and enjoy ourselves, but please,
no shouting! It's a rare pleasure to be able to hear
a minstrel like this one, with a voice like that of the gods!
But tomorrow at dawn let's go and be seated in assembly, all of us, where I'll make you a forthright public request: Get out of my home! Go find other feasts for yourselves,
consume your own goods, move around from house to house!
But if this is what you regard as better, more profitable,
to devour one man's livelihood without offering compensation, then gobble on! I'll petition the gods who are forever,
and maybe Zeus will grant me an occasion of reprisal,
so that you, while still feasting for free in my halls, all perish!"
So he spoke; and all of them bit their lips hard, astonished at the way Telemachos had spoken out so boldly.
Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, now addressed him, saying: "Telemachos, it must be the gods themselves who've taught you
this high-flown delivery, this audacious way of speaking!
You, king of sea-girt Itháke? May the son of Kronos never grant you the throne, though it's yours by ancestral right!"
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"Antinoös, what I now say may perhaps offend you.
This too I'd be glad to accept, were Zeus the giver: do you think it the worst fate that could befall a man?
To be king's no disaster: right from the start your domain Is enriched, and you yourself are held in greater honor.
Still, there are many other princes of the Achaians,
both young and old, who dwell here in sea-girt Itháke: any one of them might get this, since noble Odysseus
is dead. But I shall be lord over our own household,
and the servants that noble Odysseus got as booty for me."
Then Eurymachos, son of Polybos, responded to him, saying:
"Telemachos, all these matters rest on the knees of the gods-
like, which of the Achaians will be king in sea-girt Itháke! So keep your possessions, lord it over your own household,
and may the man never come here who'd deprive you by force of your possessions, as long as Itháke's inhabited! Yet
I'd like, my good friend, to ask you about that stranger-
Where did he come from? What country does he claim as his? Where are his relatives, his family acres, to be found?
Did he come here with news about your father's return,
or was it just to take care of some business of his own?
The way he took off and vanished, not even waiting
to meet us-he didn't look, though, like some common fellow."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Eurymachos, by now all hope for my father's return
has perished. No longer do I trust rumors from any source,
or give any heed to prophecies, such as my mother
might pick up from a seer that she'd invited home.
As for this stranger, he's from Taphos, a friend
of my father, he says, named Mentes, wise Anchialos' son, and is lord of the Taphians, those master rowers."
So spoke
Telemachos; but in his heart he knew the immortal goddess.
The suitors now turned to dancing and the pleasures of song, pursuing their revels until it was evening: only darkness interrupted their merrymaking, only then
did each of them slope off homeward to take his rest.
But Telemachos made his way to the handsome courtyard,
in a sheltering corner of which his chamber had been built, and sought his bed there, pondering much in his mind, escorted by his old nurse, who bore the lighted torches- faithful Eurykleia, daughter of Ops, Peisenor's son.
Long ago she'd been bought by Laërtes, at a good price,
when she was still a young girl: twenty oxen, no less.
He respected her in his home no less than his loyal wife, but never made love to her, for fear of his wife's anger.
So now it was she who carried the lighted torches: of all
the servants she loved him most, had nursed him as a child.
He opened the door of his well-carpentered chamber, sat down on the bed and took off his soft tunic,
then placed it in the hands of this wise old woman, who now folded and smoothed the tunic, hung it up
on a peg at the side of the corded bedstead, and went
out of the chamber, pulled the door shut behind her with its silver hook, and drew the bolt home by its thong.
So the whole night through, wrapped in a woolen blanket, he brooded over the journey Athene had planned for him.


BOOK 2

When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, Odysseus' dear son got up from the bed he'd slept in,
put on his clothes, slung a sharp sword from one shoulder, tied on a pair of fine sandals under his sleek feet,
and sallied forth from his chamber, in appearance like a god.
At once he issued orders to the clear-voiced heralds
to call to assembly the long-haired Achaians.They made
the proclamation he ordered, and quickly the people gathered. When they were met together in a single body
Telemachos now joined them, a bronze spear in one hand,
not alone, but accompanied by a pair of hunting dogs, and wondrous the grace that Athene now shed on him, so that the whole crowd watched him as he approached:
he sat in his father's seat, and the elders made way for him.
The hero Aigyptios was the first among them to speak,
a man bent with age, of much varied experience. Besides, his dear son had accompanied godlike Odysseus to Ilion, rich in fine foals, aboard the hollow ships-
the spearman Antiphos: but the savage Kyklops had killed him
in his hollow cave, the last of the crew to be eaten.
He had three other sons. One, Eurynomos, joined the suitors; the remaining two looked after the family farmlands. And yet, grieving and sorrowful, he couldn't forget the lost one.
It was in tears for him that he now addressed the assembly:
"Pay attention, men of Itháke, to what I shall now tell you!
Not once have we met in assembly, there's been no session since noble Odysseus set sail in the hollow ships!
Who, then, has summoned us now? What urgent need
has come upon one of our men, whether younger or older?
Has he had some news about an impending attack
that he can explain to us, having heard it earlier?
Or will he announce for debate some other public business?
A fine man I think him, and blessed: may Zeus grant a good fulfillment of whatever his heart desires."
So he spoke, and Odysseus' dear son rejoiced at the omen,
nor remained seated longer, in his urgency to speak,
but stood up in mid-assembly, while the scepter was placed in his hands by the herald Peisenor, a man astute in counsel; and then he spoke, first addressing the old man:
"Old sir, the man's not far, as you'll soon learn yourself:
It was I who summoned the people: this grief affects me most.
I've had no news of any impending attack
that I can explain to you, having heard of it earlier;
nor shall I announce for debate any other public business,
but rather my own needs, because of the double evil
that's befallen my house: I've lost my noble father, who once was king among you here, as gentle as any father;
and now there's a far worse plague, that will very soon destroy my house altogether, consume my whole livelihood!
My mother, against her will, is being pestered by suitors,
the sons of those very men who are the noblest here!
They shudder at the idea of going rather to the house
of her father, Ikarios, have him fix his daughter's bride-gifts and betroth her to whom he will, to the man that he prefers;
instead, day in day out, they crowd into our house,
slaughter our oxen and sheep, our fattest goats,
hold an endless party, swill down our sparkling wine without restraint. Much is lost already, there's no man such as Odysseus was, to save our house from ruin-
we ourselves lack the strength to defend it: in the event
we'd be shown up as wretched weaklings, unversed in prowess. Yet indeed I'd defend myself, if the strength was in me,
for deeds not to be borne have been done, there's nothing decent in the way my estate's been destroyed! You should feel ashamed,
embarrassed before the men in your neighborhood,
those who live near here! And beware of the gods' wrath, lest outraged by evil actions they turn against you!
By Olympian Zeus I beseech you, and by Themis,
who both dissolves and convenes our mortal assemblies,
forbear, my friends, leave me alone to pine away in bitter
sorrow-unless it could be that my father, noble Odysseus, at some point in anger mistreated the well-greaved Achaians, and now you, in angry requital, are mistreating me by urging these suitors on? For me it would be better by far
were you yourselves to consume my property and my cattle,
because, if you did the eating, there might some day be recompense-we'd hawk the story round town, demanding back our possessions, till all were restored.
But this way you burden my heart with incurable agony."
So he spoke in his anger, then threw down the scepter,
and burst into tears. Now pity took hold of all the people.
All others kept silent; no one could bring himself to offer an angry rebuttal to Telemachos' words:
only Antinoös replied to him, saying: "Telemachos,
lofty orator, angry, outspoken-what is this charge
you're trying to shame us with, put the blame on us?
It's not the Achaian suitors who are guilty in your regard but rather your own dear mother, so expert at deceit!
For it's three years now, and will soon be four, she's spent
toying with the passions in the Achaians' hearts,
offering hope to all, making promises to each one,
and sending them messages, but herself planning otherwise. And here's one other deception that she contrived:
in her halls she set up a great loom and started weaving-
very broad was the web, fine of thread-and said to us then:
'You young men, my suitors now noble Odysseus is dead,
be patient, though eager to wed me, until I finish
this web: I should not want my woven work to be wasted- a shroud for the hero Laërtes, against that day
when the grim fate of pitiless death shall overtake him:
then the local Achaian women won't be able to blame me
for a man who'd won so much being left with no winding-sheet.'
"So she spoke; and our proud hearts assented to what she said. From then on, day after day, she'd be weaving at the great loom,
but at night she'd have torches set up, and undo her work.
Thus for three years she beguiled and persuaded the Achaians; but when the fourth year arrived, and the seasons came round, then it was that one of her women, well aware of what she did, told us, and so we caught her undoing her elegant web,
and against her will she was forced to finish it. Thus
this is the suitors' response to you, to the end that you and all the Achaians may have clear knowledge of it:
send your mother away, tell her to make a marriage with whoever her father selects and whom she fancies!
But if she goes on tormenting the Achaians' sons much longer,
exploiting with forethought those talents Athene gave her- expertise in fine handiwork, outstanding intelligence and sagacity, such as we've never yet heard ascribed
to women of old, those fair-tressed Achaian ladies
Tyro, Alkmene, and garlanded Mykene,
not one of whom for shrewd planning could rival Penelope- then at least in this matter she made a wrong decision,
and they'll go on devouring your livelihood and your stock so long as she holds to this purpose that the gods
have now put into her heart. She may be winning great fame
for herself, but for you regret over your lost plenty.
As for us, we'll not disperse to our homes or anywhere else until she decides to wed whichever Achaian she picks."
Sagacious Telemachos replied as follows: "Antinoös,
I can't just drive from this house-against her will-
her who bore and reared me, while my father, alive or dead, is in some distant country! And to pay a great sum to Ikarios, as I must, if I throw out my mother, would be unfair on me.
Thus I'd get a bad deal from her father, besides which heaven
would add to my woes, since my mother on leaving our home
would invoke the foul Furies,and I'd be an object of public contempt-so this is a word I shall never utter. And you all,
if even your hearts are touched by guilt in this matter, get out of my home! Go find other feasts for yourselves,
consume your own goods, move around from house to house!
But if this is what you regard as better, more profitable,
to devour one man's livelihood without offering compensation, then gobble on! I'll petition the gods who are forever,
and maybe Zeus will grant me an occasion of reprisal,
so that you, while still feasting for free in my halls, all perish!"
So Telemachos spoke, and for him far-seeing Zeus
sent two eagles flying down from a lofty mountain peak. For a while they glided, riding upon the wind stream,
side by side, close together, wings wide outspread; but when
they arrived at the midpoint of the many-voiced assembly,
then they circled over it, with a whirr of beating wings,
tore each other's cheeks and necks on both sides with their talons, looking down, with death in their glance, on the heads of the crowd, then sped off to the right, above their homes and city.
All were amazed by what they'd witnessed of these birds,
had much heart-searching as to what they might portend, and were now addressed by the aged hero Halitherses,
Mastor's son, who excelled all men of his generation
in his knowledge of bird-signs and at interpreting omens.
He, with friendly intent, now spoke before the assembly:
"Listen well, you men of Itháke, to what I have to tell you! And the suitors above all should heed the message I bring,
for great troubles are rolling toward them, since Odysseus will not be much longer away from his friends: already, I believe,
he may well be near, and devising slaughter and death
for them all! And for others in plenty he'll mean trouble, who dwell in sunny Itháke! But we should, well beforehand, think of a way to stop them-or have them desist
of themselves, since that's a far better way for them.
I'm no novice at prophesying, I have sure knowledge,
and I declare that it's all now coming true for that man exactly as I foretold when the Argives first sailed
for Ilion, and he, resourceful Odysseus, among them. Having suffered much, with all his comrades lost,
recognized by nobody, after twenty years, I said,
he'd return home-and now all this is being fulfilled."
Eurymachos, Polybos' son, responded to him, saying: "Old man, go home, and prophesy to your children, lest they suffer some kind of misfortune in the future!
For this I'm a far more reliable prophet than you are.
There are birds in plenty that fly to and fro in the daytime, yet not all of them carry omens. As for Odysseus, he's met a distant death, and you should have perished with him- then you wouldn't be unloading all these predictions,
or lending encouragement to Telemachos' burst of temper,
in the hope that he'll reward you with a gift to your family! Let me speak plainly-and what I say will come to pass!
If you, given all the knowledge that age confers, beguile
a younger man with your words, encourage his resentment,
first, this will make more trouble for the man himself. [He won't get anything done alone, without assistance;]
and on you, old sir, we'll impose a penalty that your heart will be in torment at paying, and bitter your agony!
My own advice to Telemachos, before you all, is this:
Let him tell his mother to return to her father's domain, where they'll set up the wedding and arrange the bridal-gifts,
lots of them, all that's fitting to go with a much-loved daughter.
Failing that, I don't suppose that the sons of the Achaians
will abandon their burdensome wooing, since we fear no man-
certainly not Telemachos, for all his lengthy rant-
nor shall we heed any predictions that you, old sir, may make: they won't come true, and you'll be hated all the more!
What's more, his goods will continue to be devoured, without compensation, so long as she continues to stall
the Achaians over her marriage! Here we are, kept waiting
day after day, in rivalry for her virtue, never going
after other suitable women, such as each of us might marry."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Eurymachos, and the rest of you, all you noble suitors,
over this I'll entreat you no longer, nor discuss it further,
since by now the gods are aware of it, as are all the Achaians.
So give me a swift ship, along with twenty companions as crew on my journey, to both go there and come back.
For I'm off to Sparta and sandy Pylos, to enquire for
news about the return of my long-absent father.
Maybe some mortal can tell me, or I can pick up a rumor from Zeus, the most common way that mortals gather tidings. If I hear that my father's alive, and on his way back,
then, though beleaguered, I'll hold on for another year;
but if I get word that he's dead, no longer living,
then I'll make my way back to my own dear country, raise him a burial mound, perform funeral rites at it-
lavish ones, as is fitting-and find my mother a husband."
That said, he sat down, and there now stood up among them
Mentor, who'd been a comrade of peerless Odysseus.
When Odysseus set out with his ships, he left him in charge of his household, under Laërtes, to safeguard everything.
He, with friendly intent, now spoke before the assembly:
"Listen well, you men of Itháke, to what I have to tell you!
From now on let no kindness or gentleness be displayed
by a sceptered king, let his heart not cherish what's righteous- let him rather be ever harsh, pursue injustice, since
there's nobody now who remembers godlike Odysseus of the people whose lord he was, and kindly as a father!
It's not these arrogant suitors I so much resent,
for their violent acts and their nasty-minded misconduct- they risk their own lives by forcibly wolfing down Odysseus' goods, and saying he'll never return-
no, it's you, all the rest of the people, that I find fault with,
for sitting there silent, not speaking out roundly to stop
these suitors, though they are few, while you are many."
Against him Leokritos, son of Euenor, now spoke out: "Mentor, you mischief-maker, you're crazy! What's all this talk about putting us down? It'd be a tough business
even for more men than these to clamp down on our feasting!
And what if Odysseus himself, the Ithákan, did return, to find these haughty suitors banqueting in his palace, and resolved in his heart to throw them all out? His wife would get no joy of his homecoming, however deeply
she'd missed him: he'd suffer a shameful death on the spot
if he fought outnumbered. Your threats lack reality!
And you, good people, disperse now, each to his own affairs; and as for this fellow here, Mentor and Halitherses
will speed his departure-they're old friends of his father's!
But myself, I think he'll just sit around listening to rumors
right here in Itháke: he'll never accomplish this journey!"
With that, he abruptly dismissed the assembly. They all dispersed at once, each man to his own house, except
the suitors, who went off to the house of godlike Odysseus,
and Telemachos, who withdrew, alone, to the seashore,
washed his hands in the grey salt water, then prayed to Athene: "Hear me, you god who came yesterday to our home,
and told me to travel by ship across the misty deep to seek news of my long-absent father's return!
Now all my plans are being held up by the Achaians,
and, above all, by these viciously arrogant suitors!"
So he spoke in prayer, and Athene then approached him, assuming Mentor's likeness in both voice and appearance, and addressed him as follows, uttering winged words: "Telemachos, you'll turn out neither craven nor witless
if indeed you've been imbued with your father's rare strength- such a man he was, so masterful in both deeds and words!
In that case your journey won't be useless or unfulfilled; but if you're not his son, his and Penelope's, then
I have no hope you'll accomplish what you're planning.
Few are the sons who prove the equal of their fathers: most are worth less, hardly any prove themselves better.
But since it would seem that you are neither craven nor witless, and that Odysseus' resourcefulness hasn't passed you over,
there is a fair chance that you will bring this business off !
So don't worry about these suitors' attitudes and notions- They're witless creatures, neither sensible nor right-thinking, and wholly unaware of the fact that death and black fate
are very near, that on the same day they'll all perish!
But for you that journey you're planning is not far distant,
so true a companion I am to your father's family- I'll fit you out a swift ship, accompany you myself.
Now go back to the house, keep company with the suitors, make ready provisions, pack them all in containers:
the wine in jars, and the barley meal, men's marrow,
in stout leather bags. Meanwhile, I'll go through the town and find you a volunteer crew. As for ships, there are plenty here in sea-girt Itháke, both old and new: of these
I myself will select you the one that best suits your purpose,
and we'll soon fit her out, launch her into the open sea."
So spoke Zeus' daughter Athene. Telemachos did not linger, after he'd heard the voice of the goddess,
but made his way back to the house, much troubled at heart, and found the proud suitors already there in his halls,
busy flaying goats and singeing fat hogs in the courtyard.
Antinoös, laughing, came over, confronted Telemachos, took his hand, and had this to say to him, speaking plainly: "Telemachos, lofty talker, angry, outspoken-no longer nurse in your heart any evil thoughts or actions,
but, please, eat and drink with us, as you did before!
All these things the Achaians will surely provide for you- a vessel and hand-picked oarsmen, to give you a speedy voyage to sacred Pylos, to seek news of your father."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying:
"Antinoös, there's no way I could feast with you arrogant lot
undistracted, much less enjoy myself in comfort!
Is it not enough, you suitors, that in the past you devoured so much of my choice possessions, when I was still a child!
But now that I'm grown, and can figure the truth from what
others tell me, and passion is surging up within me,
I'll try directing the evil death-spirits against you, either by going to Pylos, or here in this district! But go I will, nor shall the journey I speak of be made in vain, though I'm a passenger, lacking a ship and oarsmen
of my own: this, I presume, was how you wanted it."
That said, he withdrew his hand from the hand of Antinoös, lightly. Meanwhile the suitors, busy preparing dinner
about the house, made mock of him to each other,
and this is how one of these arrogant youths would talk:
"Oh, for sure, Telemachos must be planning our murder!
He'll bring over helpers either from sandy Pylos
or maybe from Sparta, he wants it so desperately-
or he's thinking of going to Ephyre, that rich plowland,
to pick up some deadly poisons, bring them back here,
drizzle them into the wine bowl, and destroy us all!"
Again, another of these arrogant youths would announce: "Who knows? Maybe he himself, going off in his hollow ship, far from his friends, will die wandering, like Odysseus!
That way he'd cause us even more trouble-we'd have
to share out all his possessions, turn over the house
to his mother to keep, and whoever it was she married."
So they spoke. Telemachos now went down to his father's storeroom, broad and high-ceilinged, where gold and bronze lay piled,
with clothes in chests, an abundance of sweet-smelling oil,
and jars of wine, well aged and sweet on the palate,
holding within them an unmixed heavenly drink,
set close together along the wall, for the day when Odysseus, after laboring through much hardship, might come back home. The close-carpentered double doors remained shut and locked,
and both day and night a housekeeper kept watch there,
guarding everything, both prudent and vigilant:
Eurykleia, daughter of Ops, Peisenor's son. Her now Telemachos called to the storeroom, and addressed her, saying: "Good old nurse, please draw me off wine in two-handled jars-
sweet wine, the best there is after what you're keeping back
for him, the ill-fated one, just in case from heaven knows where Zeus' scion Odysseus returns, escaping death and the fates!
Fill me twelve jars, and fit them all with stoppers,
and measure out barley into well-stitched leather bags-
there should be twenty measures of well-ground barley meal.
Have all this taken care of. No one else is to know about it.
I'll pick up the load this evening, when my mother goes to her upper chamber and retires for the night.
For I'm making a journey to Sparta and to sandy Pylos
to seek any news I may learn about my dear father's return."
So he spoke, and his dear nurse Eurykleia shrieked aloud,
and, lamenting, then addressed him with winged words, saying: "Ah, how, dear child, did this thought ever enter your mind?
Where in this whole wide earth do you plan to go to, you,
an only child and much loved? But Odysseus, scion of Zeus,
has already died, far from home, in some foreign country,
and the moment you're gone these men will make trouble for you,
destroy you by guile, and share out all your goods!
Stay here and look after what's yours: you have no need
to wander and suffer misfortunes on the unharvested sea."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to her, saying: "Never fear, old nurse: this plan does not lack divine support!
Now, promise you won't say a word of it to my mother before eleven or twelve days have passed, or else until
she herself misses me and hears that I've set out-
I don't want her to spoil her fine complexion with weeping."
So he spoke: the old woman swore a great oath, by the gods,
that she wouldn't tell. When she'd sworn, and completed the oath, she at once drew off the wine in two-handled jars,
and measured the barley meal into well-stitched leather bags,
while Telemachos went back to the hall and joined the suitors.
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another thought: in Telemachos' likeness she went all around the city, approaching each man in turn with an identical message,
that they should assemble that evening alongside the swift ship.
That done, she then asked Noemon, illustrious son
of Phronios, for a swift ship. He readily promised it her.
So the sun went down, and all the ways were in shadow, and she drew the swift ship down to the sea, and left it
with all the gear that well-benched vessels carry, moored at the harbor entrance. Beside it a doughty
company gathered: the goddess put strength in each man there.
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another thought: she made her way to the home of godlike Odysseus,
and there shed sweet drowsiness over all the suitors as they drank, befuddled their wits, made them drop their cups.
Up they got, to go home to bed: no longer did they sit on there, now sleep weighed heavy on their eyelids.
That done, to Telemachos grey-eyed Athene now spoke,
called him out from his well-established domain,
assuming the likeness of Mentor, in both form and voice: "Telemachos, already your well-greaved comrades are seated at their oars, ready and waiting for the start of your voyage! Come then, let's go, no point in delaying your departure."
That said, Pallas Athene now briskly led the way,
and Telemachos followed behind, in the goddess' footsteps. When they came down to the sea and the vessel, they found their long-haired comrades there, awaiting them on the shore, and Telemachos, princely in power, now addressed them, saying:
"Come, friends, let us fetch the provisions: they're all ready,
back in the hall. My mother knows nothing of this, nor do her maidservants, except for the one I told."
So saying, he led the way, and they accompanied him.
They carried back all the provisions, stowed them away
in the well-benched ship, as Odysseus' fine son commanded.
Then Telemachos went aboard, preceded by Athene, who sat herself down in the stern, and Telemachos came and sat down beside her. Men cast off the stern warps
and scrambled aboard, and took their seats on the benches.
Now grey-eyed Athene sent them a following wind,
a fresh west wind, loud-sounding over the wine-dark deep.
Telemachos urged on his crew, gave them the order to haul on the sheets, and they obeyed his command.
They raised the fir-wood mast, set it upright in its hollow
mast-block, firmly belayed the sheets to the forestays,
then hauled up the white sail with cords of plaited oxhide.
The wind bellied the mid-sail, and cleft by the cutwater
a dark surging wave sang aloud as the ship drove forward, shearing her path through the deep, accomplishing her journey.
When they'd belayed the tackle in the swift black ship
they set out mixing bowls brimming with wine, and poured libations to the immortal gods that are forever,
and foremost of all to the grey-eyed daughter of Zeus. So all night and into the dawn the vessel cut her course.


BOOK 3

Deserting the deep's enchanting surface, the sun rose up into the brazen sky to bring light both to immortals and to mortal beings upon the grain-rich plowland, and they came to Pylos, the well-built citadel of Neleus.
Here, on the shore of the sea, sacrifices were being made
of all-black bulls to the dark-haired Earth-Shaker. Nine companies there were, and five hundred men were seated
in each, and each brought nine bulls. It was when they'd sampled the innards and were burning thigh pieces for the gods
that the travelers arrived. They at once hauled up and brailed
the trim ship's sail, moored her, and came ashore themselves. With Athene leading the way, Telemachos disembarked,
and the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, now first addressed him, saying: "Telemachos, you've no longer the least need for modesty-
the whole point of your voyage is to get news of your father:
where he may have been buried, what kind of fate he met. But for now, go straight up to Nestor, tamer of horses, and let's find out what advice lies hidden in his breast!
Entreat him yourself, have him tell you the true story-
a lie he won't utter: he's a most sagacious person."
Sagacious Telemachos answered her in these words:
"What, Mentor, must be my approach? How am I to greet him?
I've no experience yet in subtle discourse; a young man feels embarrassed when interrogating his elders."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Telemachos, there are some things you'll figure out for yourself, and for others you'll have divine guidance-I don't think
you were born and raised without the gods' good favor."
So Pallas Athene spoke, and proceeded to lead the way
briskly, Telemachos following in the goddess' footsteps,
and they came to the Pylian men's assembly and companies.
There Nestor sat with his sons, and around them their comrades were preparing the feast, roasting some meat, had the rest on spits.
But when they spotted the strangers, they all came flocking
to meet them, shook their hands, made them sit down.
Peisistratos, Nestor's son, was the first to reach them, took them both by the hand, seated them at the feast on soft sheepskins, there on the sandy seashore,
next to his father and Thrasymedes his brother,
gave them helpings of innards, poured out wine
in a golden cup, and addressed with welcoming words Pallas Athene, daughter of Zeus, who bears the aegis: "Make your prayer now, stranger, to the lord Poseidon, for his is the feast you have chanced upon, coming here.
And when you have fittingly prayed and poured libations,
then give this man also the cup of honey-sweet wine to pour a libation, since he, too, I take it, prays
to the immortals: all humans stand in need of the gods. Still, he is younger, and about the same age as I am:
that's why to you first I now give this golden cup."
So saying, he placed in her hand the cup of sweet wine, and Athene rejoiced at this man's nice sense of decorum, in giving the golden cup to her first of all; and at once she offered this heartfelt prayer to the lord Poseidon:
"Hear me, Poseidon, Earth-Mover! Do not begrudge us
fulfillment of all that our prayers are now requesting!
On Nestor, first and foremost, and his sons, bestow renown, and next, to the rest, to all Pylians, grant a pleasing
requital for this most splendid and generous sacrifice!
Grant, too, that we may go home again, Telemachos and I,
having achieved what we came here for in our swift black ship."
So she prayed-and herself was bringing it all to pass. Now she gave to Telemachos the fine two-handled cup, and in like manner Odysseus' dear son then prayed.
When the outer meat was roasted, and off the spits, they next
divided the helpings, and shared in the sumptuous feast. But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink, the first to speak was Nestor, the Gerenian horseman: "Now is a better time to interrogate these strangers,
enquire who they are, now they've had their fill of food.
So, strangers, who are you? From where was it you sailed here over the watery ways? On business? Or are you reckless rovers,
cruising the sea like pirates, who, at risk of their own lives, go around making trouble for men from other lands?"
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, greatly
encouraged: Athene herself now put fresh confidence into his heart, to enquire about his long-absent father, [and win a good reputation among men at large]:"Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaians,
you want to know where we come from? Then I shall tell you.
We're here from that part of Itháke under Mount Neïon, and the business I'll speak of isn't public, but personal. I've come to pursue any rumors about my father-
the noble, steadfast Odysseus, who once, they say,
fighting alongside you, brought down the Trojans' city.
Of all the others who fought against the Trojans, we've since learned how and where it was that each met his grim end; but with him Kronos' son has ensured that even his death's
unknown-no one can say for certain the place where he perished, whether dispatched by enemies on the mainland
or out on the deep, amid Amphitrite's breakers.
That's why I'm here at your knees now-you might be willing to tell me about his grim death, if you maybe saw it
yourself, or heard an account of it from some other
wanderer: to unmatched sorrow his mother bore him!
And don't, from concern or pity, speak false comfort to me,
but tell me exactly whatever you may have witnessed!
I beseech you, if ever my father, noble Odysseus, made you any promise, by word or action, and delivered on it
in the land of the Trojans, where you Achaians met grief,
remember it now, and tell me the unerring truth of it."
Nestor, Gerenian horseman, responded to him, saying: "Friend, since you've recalled all the grief that we endured in that land-we, the dauntless sons of the Achaians!-
whether on board our ships, on the hazy deep, in pursuit
of booty, wherever Achilles might choose to lead us,
or our drawn-out struggle around King Priam's great city- ah, it was there that all our very best were slain!
There lies the warrior Aias, there lies Achilles, there
Patroklos, a man who could match the gods in counsel;
and there my own dear son, so strong and so virtuous- Antilochos, in the first rank as both runner and fighter. Many more ills we endured in addition to these: their sum what transient mortal could ever narrate in full?
Not even were you to stay for five-no, six!-whole years
would you hear of all the woes the noble Achaians bore there- and before then, surfeited, you'd have gone back home for sure!
Nine years we were busy cobbling up trouble for them with ruses of every sort: Kronos' son took a weary age
to finish the job! There no one tried to compete with noble
Odysseus in scheming, since he far outstripped them all with ruses of every sort-he, your father, if it's really true that you are his offspring! When I look at you I wonder, for your way of speaking is like his, one would never think
that so young a man could speak in so proper a manner!
The whole time noble Odysseus and I were out there, neither in council nor in assembly did we oppose each other,
but, being of one mind, with good plans and shrewd judgment we'd counsel the Argives on their best course of action.
But after we'd sacked the towering citadel of Priam
and had sailed away, and a god had scattered the Achaians, then indeed it was that Zeus planned a grim homecoming
for the Argives, since not all of them were either right-thinking or civilized: thus many met a bad end through the deadly
wrath of the grey-eyed daughter of a mighty sire. It was she
who stirred up strife between the two sons of Atreus. The two of them called an assembly of all the Achaians, thoughtlessly, not in due order, very close to sunset, and the Achaians' sons arrived well loaded with wine
to hear their speeches, and learn why they'd been summoned.
Now Menelaös was urging the whole body of the Achaians to embark on the voyage home, over the sea's broad back; but this didn't please Agamemnon at all: what he wanted was to keep the army in place, and make lavish sacrifices
to appease the dread wrath of Athene-fool that he was,
not knowing that she wouldn't pay him the least attention, since the mind of the gods eternal is not changed in a moment. So the pair of them stood there, exchanging angry words, while the well-greaved Achaians sprang to their feet with a
deafening
clamor, and both these schemes collected their supporters.
We spent that night nursing harsh thoughts against
one another, while Zeus was devising a grief of evils. At dawn some of us hauled our vessel down to the bright salt sea,
and put aboard our possessions and our deep-sashed women;
but half of the force held back, remained in place there
with Atreus' son Agamemnon, his people's shepherd.
So half of us now embarked, and rowed out: swiftly our ships moved on, for a god smoothed the monster-infested deep.
When we reached Tenedos we sacrificed to the gods,
longing for home; but Zeus, not thinking yet of return-
the wretch!-rather stirred up bad strife for the second time! Some now brought their curved vessels around, sailed back with lordly Odysseus-so clever, so subtle-minded-
once again showing favor to Atreus' son Agamemnon;
but I, with the full squadron of ships that followed me,
kept retreating-I realized the god was planning trouble!- as did Tydeus' son too, Ares' favorite, urging on his men, while, late in the day, there followed us fair-haired Meneläos, who caught up with us at Lesbos, debating the long voyage-
should we set our course seaward, north of rocky Chios,
by the island of Psyra, with Chios on our port side,
or sail landward of Chios, past Mimas' windswept headland? So we asked the god to show us a sign, and he did,
bidding us cut our way through the deep-sea route to Euboia,
and thus the soonest get ourselves clear of misfortune.
A good tailwind got up now and blew: our vessels ran swiftly across the sea's fish-rich paths and reached Geraistos at night: to Poseidon we sacrificed many
bulls' thighs, grateful that we'd traversed the open water.
It was on the fourth day that the comrades of Diomedes
the horse breaker anchored their trim ships at Argos;
but I held on course for Pylos, nor did that good tailwind drop once, from the time the god first set it on to blow. Thus I came back, dear child, without news, nor do I know
anything of the rest, which Achaians survived, which perished. But such reports as have reached me while ensconced here at home I shall pass on, as is proper, and not conceal them from you.
The Myrmidons, those fierce spearmen, they say made it back, led by great-hearted Achilles' illustrious son; back too
came Philoktetes, the distinguished offspring of Poias,
while Idomeneus brought safely home to Krete all those comrades surviving the conflict: the sea took none of them. About Atreus' son you yourselves, though distant, will have heard: how he returned, how Aigisthos devised a grim end for him.
Yet Aigisthos indeed was to pay a most terrible reckoning:
so it's good that when any man dies a son should survive, since here was a son took revenge on his father's killer- the crafty Aigisthos, who'd murdered his famous father.
You too, my friend-for I see how handsome and tall you are- be valiant, that men yet unborn may speak well of you!"
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying: "Nestor, Neleus' son, great glory of the Achaians,
that man indeed got full vengeance, and the Achaians
shall spread his fame far and wide, for men unborn to hear! If only the gods would endow me with the strength
to punish these suitors for their grievous transgression- their wanton insults, their malicious acts against me!
But no such good fortune have the gods ever assigned to me or my father: now I just have to endure."
Nestor, Gerenian horseman, responded to him, saying: "Friend, since by mentioning it you've reminded me of this, numerous suitors, they say, for your mother's hand, are there in your halls against your will, and making trouble for you.
So tell me, are you letting yourself be bullied, or do
the folk of the district, swayed by some god's word, despise you?
Who knows, one day he may come back, may be revenged, either alone, or with all the Achaians. If only grey-eyed Athene might choose now to love you as much as once, long ago, she was concerned for renowned Odysseus
in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaians suffered
much hardship: for never I saw such open love from the gods
as Pallas Athene showed him, standing openly at his side!
If she would love you as much, and care for you in her heart, then some of these men would quite forget about marriage."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying
"Old sir, I don't think your words will ever find fulfillment: What you say is too much, I'm dumbfounded, what I hope for could never happen, not even were the gods to will it so!"
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "Telemachos, what's this word has escaped your teeth's barrier?
A determined god could save a man easily, even from afar! I'd rather endure endless setbacks on the journey back before I got home, and saw the day of my returning, rather than make it there only to perish, as Agamemnon
was killed by Aigisthos' treachery, and that of his own wife.
Yet death, that's common to all, not the gods themselves can ward off even from a man they love, whenever
the dire fate of pitiless death has once got hold of him."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"Mentor, despite our grief, let's talk no more of these matters:
For him a return's not reality now: long, long before this
for him the immortals will have contrived death and black fate. But now I want to ask Nestor about a different matter,
since his knowledge of justice and wisdom is unsurpassed-
three times, they say, he's ruled a generation of men,
and to me he has the appearance of an immortal! So, Nestor, son of Neleus, tell me this in all honesty:
how did Atreus' son die, wide-ruling Agamemnon?
And where was Menelaös? What death for the king did sly
Aigisthos contrive, since it was a far better man he killed?
Was he, Menelaös, not there in Achaian Argos, but roaming abroad, so that Aigisthos could nerve himself for murder?"
Nestor, Gerenian horseman, responded to him, saying: "Very well then, my child: I shall tell you the whole truth.
You yourself are clear how all this would have turned out
had Atreus' son, fair-haired Menelaös, discovered, on his return from Troy, Aigisthos alive in his halls!
Not even on his corpse then would the earth have been piled, but the dogs and the birds of prey would have devoured him
as he lay on the plain, far outside the city, nor would any
Achaian women have mourned him, so vile the deed he wrought. While we were bivouacked out there, campaigning long and hard, he, at his ease in a corner of horse-grazing Argos,
was making seductive proposals to Agamemnon's wife.
Now she indeed to begin with rejected the shameful act,
did the noble Klytaimnestra, since hers was a virtuous heart; and with her she had a minstrel, whom Atreus' son had ordered, before leaving for Troy, to be her strict bodyguard.
But when divine destiny ensnared her for destruction,
then it was that Aigisthos marooned the minstrel, left him
on a desert island, a tasty morsel for birds of prey.
Her then he took back-both willing-to his own home. Many thigh pieces he burned on the gods' hallowed altars, and hung up numerous offerings, both woven and golden,
after bringing off the vile action he never hoped to achieve.
"We were sailing together on our way back from Troy, Atreus' son and myself, close friends with one another;
but when we reached sacred Sounion, the headland of Athens, there it was that Phoibos Apollo slew Menelaös' steersman,
assailing him with his painless shafts while in his hands
he still held the steering oar of the speeding vessel-
Phrontis, the son of Onetor, who excelled all tribes of mankind at steering a ship when gale-force winds were blowing.
So Menelaös put in there, though impatient to be sailing,
to bury his comrade, perform the proper rites over him.
But when he too in his voyage over the wine-dark deep in his hollow ships arrived off the sheer heights of Malea,
running swiftly, then far-seeing Zeus devised a way to make his voyage disastrous: poured blasts of shrill winds on him,
swelled the waves to vast size, till they resembled mountains. Then he split the flotilla in two, directed some ships to Krete,
to where the Kydonians dwelt around Iardanos' streams. There's a certain steep headland, juts sheer out into the sea, at the frontier of Gortyn, in the mist-shrouded deep,
where southwest gales drive great waves against the headland's
left side, toward Phaistos, and low rocks hold back the waves' violence. Here some ships came, their crewmen barely escaping disaster: the ships themselves were smashed
to pieces upon the reef. But the five other dark-prowed vessels
were carried away by wind and wave to Egypt.
So Menelaös spent time there amassing goods and gold, going to and fro in his ships among men of alien speech. 
Meanwhile Aigisthos back home enacted his grim plot: he killed Atreus' son, had the people as his subjects.
Seven years he reigned as king over golden Mykenai
but in the eighth evil came for him-the noble Orestes, back home from Athens, who slew his father's slayer, the crafty Aigisthos, who'd murdered his famous father.
After he'd killed him, he held a funeral feast for the Argives
over his hateful mother and the cowardly Aigisthos,
and that same day there arrived Menelaös of the great war cry, with treasure galore, as much freight as his ships could carry.
"So you too, friend, should not wander over-far from home, leaving your wealth behind you, as well as men in your house
of such arrogance, lest they share and devour your goods,
making your journey here a mere fool's errand! But now the man I insist on your visiting is Menelaös, for he
has lately returned from abroad, got himself back home from a people that no one would ever hope in his heart
to return from, once great storms had driven him off course
into a sea so vast that migrant birds take an entire year to travel back from it, so vast and fearsome it is!
So be off with you now, you, your ship, and your comrades- or go overland if you'd rather: here are chariot and horses,
and here, too, are my sons, who'll accompany you as guides
to lordly Lakedaimon, home to fair-haired Menelaös. Appeal to him in person, to tell you the whole truth:
He won't tell you lies, he's far too sagacious." So
he spoke, and the sun went down, and darkness came on.
Among them there then spoke the goddess, grey-eyed Athene:
"Old sir, all this that you've told us was properly conveyed. But come now, cut up the ox tongues, and mix the wine, so that after libations to Poseidon and the other immortals we may turn our minds to sleep: that time has arrived.
Light's passed under darkness already, and it's not fitting
to sit late at a feast of the gods: best to be on one's way."
So spoke the daughter of Zeus, and they paid attention to her. Heralds now poured out water over their hands,
while young men topped up the mixing bowls with wine
and served it to them all, with drops first in each cup.
The tongues they threw in the fire, then stood, and poured libations on them. This done, when they'd drunk as much as they felt like, then both Athene and godlike Telemachos were eager to be on their way to the hollow ship;
but Nestor spoke persuasively, anxious to keep them there:
"Zeus forbid, and all the other immortal gods,
that you should go back from my house to your hollow ship
as though from some indigent wretch with no spare bedclothes, no coverlets in his home, no abundance of blankets
on which both he and his guests could sleep in comfort!
Here in my house are coverlets and the finest blankets, and never shall the dear son of that fine man Odysseus bed down on a ship's afterdeck as long as I'm alive, and sons survive after me, are left here in my halls
to look after whatever guest-friend may come visiting."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "This was well said, old friend! And it's right that Telemachos should listen to you, since that is by far the better way.
So he'll stay with you tonight, sleep on a bed in your house;
but I shall take myself off to our black ship,
cheer our companions, tell them all the news.
For I think I'm the only older person among them:
the rest are younger men, who came with him as friends, all about the same age as great-hearted Telemachos.
It's there I shall lie tonight, by the hollow black ship;
then tomorrow morning I'll be off to the great-hearted Kaukonians, where there's a debt owed to me, neither recent nor small. But you send this young man, your visiting guest, on his way in a chariot, along with your son, and give him
horses as well, your lightest runners, your best for strength."
So saying, the grey-eyed goddess Athene went on her way in the likeness of a sea eagle: all who saw it were astounded,
including old Nestor, who marveled at what his eyes beheld, and he clasped Telemachos' hand, and said to him: "Friend,
I hardly think you'll turn out a mean fellow or a coward
if indeed when you're so young the gods act as your escorts!
For this was none other of those whose homes are on Olympos than Zeus' own true-born daughter, maiden most glorious, who likewise honored your noble father among the Argives!
Be gracious to me, my queen, grant me high renown
for myself, for my sons, and for my revered bedfellow,
and to you in return I'll sacrifice a yearling heifer, broad-browed, still unbroken, that no man has yet led under the yoke:
that's the one I shall sacrifice, and gild her horns with gold."
So he spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him.
Now Nestor, Gerenian horseman, led them, with his sons and his daughters' husbands, to his splendid domain,
and when they reached the renowned domain of the king, they sat down there in order on the chairs and benches.
When all of them were settled, the old man mixed them a bowl of delicious wine, which was in its eleventh year
when the housekeeper broke its seal and opened the jar.
This wine the old man mixed, with many prayers, as he poured libations to Athene, daughter of Zeus of the aegis.
When they'd poured libations, and drunk all they'd a mind to, they went to lie down and sleep, each one in his own dwelling.
But Nestor, Gerenian horseman, kept Telemachos, the dear son of godlike Odysseus, to sleep there, settling him down
on a corded bedstead out in the echoing portico,
and with him Peisistratos, of the good ash spear, a leader
of men, a still unmarried son of his in the halls,
while he himself took his repose in the high house's inmost room, and beside him his lady wife now shared their bed and marriage.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
Nestor, Gerenian horseman, rose from his bed, went out,
and sat himself down on one of the polished stone blocks that stood outside his high entrance doors, bright white with a gleam as of oil. This was the place where in time past
Neleus would sit, a counselor as prestigious as any god;
but he'd long since succumbed to fate, gone down to Hades,
and now Gerenian Nestor, the Achaians' guardian, sat there, scepter in hand, and around him a crowd of his sons gathered, coming out from their bedrooms: Echéphron, Stratios, Perseus, Aretos, and-a match for a god-Thrasymedes;
then, sixth after these, the hero Peisistratos followed,
beside whom they brought in and seated godlike Telemachos. Nestor, Gerenian horseman, was the first to speak among them: "Quickly now, my dear children, help realize my desire-
that very first of all deities I may propitiate Athene,
who came, clearly manifest, to our rich feast for the god!
So let one man go to the plain for a heifer, making sure that it comes here right away, with its cowherd driving it; and another to the black ship of great-hearted Telemachos, to fetch all his comrades, leaving there two men only;
and another again to send here the goldsmith Laerkes,
to overlay the horns of the heifer with gold. You others are all to stay here, and issue instructions to my servants that they should make ready a feast in my far-famed halls,
and bring in more chairs and firewood and clear bright water."
So he spoke, and they all bustled busily. The heifer arrived
from the plain, and, from their swift trim vessel, great-hearted Telemachos' comrades showed up. The smith came too bringing his bronze tools, the essentials of his trade:
anvil and hammer and finely fashioned tongs
with which he worked the gold. Athene likewise came
to be there at the sacrifice. Then Nestor, old chariot driver, gave the smith gold: he prepared it, overlaid the heifer's horns, that the goddess might rejoice at the sight of her offering.
By its horns Stratios and noble Echéphron led in the heifer,
and Aretos, bringing out water in a flower-decked basin,
came from the inner chamber, in his other hand a basket
of barley-grain; Thrasymedes, that doughty fighter, stood by, a sharp axe in his hand with which to fell the heifer,
while Perseus readied the blood bowl. Nestor, old chariot driver,
began with the lustral water and sprinkling of barley, offered
long prayers to Athene, threw the victim's cut hairs in the fire.
When they'd prayed, and scattered the barley grains, then at once Nestor's son, high-spirited Thrasymedes, stepped
forward and struck. His axe sheared through the neck's tendons,
undid the strength of the heifer. The women keened:
the daughters, the sons' wives, Nestor's revered bedfellow Eurydike, the eldest of Klymenos' daughters.
The men now raised the victim from the wide-wayed earth and held it; Peisistratos, leader of men, cut its throat.
When the black blood had flowed from it, and life had left its bones,
at once they dismembered it, chopped out the thigh pieces all in due order, then covered them with a layer of fat folded double, laid raw bits of meat upon them. Then
the old man roasted them over split billets, drizzled with bright
wine, and young men beside him held their five-pronged forks.
When the thighs were properly barbecued, and they'd had a taste of the innards, they cut up the rest and roasted it on spits
until it was done through, held the pointed spits in their hands.
Telemachos meanwhile was bathed by beautiful Polykaste,
the youngest daughter of Nestor, Neleus' son; and after
she'd bathed him, and massaged him generously with oil, and dressed him in a fine mantle and tunic, he came forth from the bathtub in appearance like the immortals, and went and seated himself by Nestor, the shepherd of his people.
When the outer flesh was well roasted they drew it off the spits,
and sat down and feasted; good fellows waited on them, pouring the wine out for them into golden goblets.
But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink, Nestor, Gerenian horseman, was the first to speak among them:
"Come, my sons, harness up our fine-maned horses to
the chariot for Telemachos, so he can start his journey."
So he spoke, and they hearkened promptly, and obeyed him: at once to the chariot they harnessed the swift horses,
and the housekeeper put in the chariot bread and wine
and cooked meat, such as princes, Zeus' nurslings, feed upon.
Then Telemachos climbed aboard the elegant chariot, And Nestor's son Peisistratos, leader of men,
mounted beside him, took the reins in his hands, and used the whip to start the pair: they, nothing loath, sped off
onto the plain, abandoning Pylos' steep citadel,
and all day shook the yoke that spanned their shoulders. Then the sun went down, and all the ways were in shadow, and they came to Pherai, to the dwelling of Diokles
the son of Ortilochos, whom Alpheios sired as his offspring,
and spent the night there; he treated them as guest-friends.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, they yoked the horses, boarded the inlaid chariot,
drove out from the courtyard and echoing portico, used the whip to start the pair: they, nothing loath, sped off,
and came to the wheat-bearing plain. From there they pursued their journey at speed, so well did their swift horses bear them.
Then the sun went down, and all the ways were in shadow.


BOOK 4

Now they came to deep-hollowed Lakedaimon with its ravines and drove till they reached the domain of far-famed Menelaös. Him they found holding a wedding feast with his many kinsmen for a son and an elegant daughter, there in his own dwelling:
her he was sending out to Achilles' son, the rank-breaker,
for in Troy's country he first had pledged his word that he'd give her to him, and now the gods were fulfilling the match.
With horses and chariots she was soon to travel
to the Myrmidons' famed city,where her spouse was king;
while he was bringing from Sparta Alektor's daughter,
to wed his favorite son, the doughty Megapenthes, born of a slave girl: to Helen the gods granted no more issue after her first child, the lovely Hermione,
who had all the beauty of golden Aphrodite. So they
were feasting there in the spacious high-roofed hall-
the neighbors and kinsmen of far-famed Menelaös,
at ease, while among them a godlike minstrel was singing and playing the lyre, while two tumblers circled
about in the thick of them, leading off the dance.
The two out at the gateway, themselves and their horses-
the hero Telemachos and Nestor's splendid son- pulled up short, were seen by the lord Eteoneus as he came out: he, the deft squire of far-famed Menelaös.
Back through the hall he went to tell the people's shepherd,
approached him, and standing close uttered these winged words:
"Menelaös, Zeus' nursling, there are two strangers here-
two men who look very much like the offspring of great Zeus! Tell me, shall we unharness their speedy horses,
or send them on somewhere else for their entertainment?"
Much annoyed, fair-haired Menelaös made him this answer:
'You used not to be a fool, Eteoneus, Boethoös' son, hitherto: but now you're babbling nonsense like a child! We two ate well and often as the guests of other men, generous hosts, on our way home, hoping only that Zeus
might rid us of sorrows hereafter. So go, unyoke the horses
of these our guests, bring the guests themselves to the feast!"
So he spoke. Eteoneus ran through the hall, calling out to his busy fellow attendants to follow along with him.
They unharnessed the sweating horses from the yoke pole
and tethered them by their reins at the mangers for horses,
scattering fodder for them, emmer mixed with white barley. Then they left the chariot resting against the white entrance walls and led their guests into the godlike domain. What they saw amazed them, passing through the abode of this king who was
Zeus' nursling: a brightness like that of the sun or moon
lit up the high-roofed dwelling of far-famed Menelaös.
And when they'd feasted their eyes on this spectacle, they stepped into polished bathtubs and were bathed. Then, after maidservants had washed them, massaged them with oil,
and clothed them in tunics and woolen mantles, they
sat down on high chairs next to Atreus' son Menelaös.
A handmaid fetched and poured them water from a pitcher- exquisite, golden-over a silver basin, for them
to wash their hands, and placed a polished table nearby,
while the dignified housekeeper brought bread, set it before them,
with various side dishes, giving freely of her provisions,
and the carver loaded and brought to them platters of meat of every kind, and put golden goblets before them.
Then fair-haired Menelaös welcomed them in these words:
"Fall to, and enjoy yourselves! Afterwards, when you've eaten
your dinner, then we'll question you as to who you may be among men, for in you two the ancestry's not obscure- your mortal bloodline's that of those sceptered princes,
Zeus' own nurslings: no commoner could have sired such sons."
With that he picked up and set before them the fat beef chine, well roasted, that he himself had received as an honor. Then they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them.
But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink, then it was that Telemachos spoke to the son of Nestor,
head leaning close to him, so that others might not hear:
"Just look, son of Nestor, friend dear to my heart, at all
the bright shine of bronze throughout these echoing halls, the gleam of gold and amber, of silver and ivory!
The court of Olympian Zeus must be like this inside,
there's such limitless wealth here: I'm awed by the sight of it!"
As he spoke, fair-haired Menelaös picked up what he said, and addressed them both as follows, in winged words: "Dear children, with Zeus no mortal might ever contend, for eternal are his residences and his possessions;
but of men I might have a rival, or again I might not,
in possessions! True, after I'd suffered much, wandered far, I came back home in the eighth year, bringing my wealth in my ships, having visited Cyprus, Phoenicia, Egypt,
the Aithiopes, the Sidonians, and the Eremboi,
and Libya, where the lambkins grow horns almost from birth,
and the ewes give birth three times within a single year, so that neither master nor shepherd ever goes without cheese or mutton or sweet milk, but their flocks
are ready for milking the whole year through. But while
I was busy amassing a sizable livelihood as I roamed
from country to country, another man killed my brother-
secretly, caught him off guard, through the guile of his damned wife! So it gives me no pleasure to be lord of these possessions.
Besides, you'll have heard all this from your fathers, whoever
they are, since I suffered greatly, losing a well-established
household, that contained many rare possessions! If only
I could live in this house of mine with no more than a third part of those goods, and that all the men were alive still who died in broad Troy, far away from horse-grazing Argos!
Yet though I so often weep and lament for them all
as I sit here in my home-at times I indulge my heart by mourning, but then again I'll stop, for all too soon one reaches one's surfeit of sorrow-nevertheless, despite my grief, I don't mourn so much for them all
as for that one, who makes me abhor both sleep and food
when I recall him: no other Achaian suffered such hardship or achieved as much as Odysseus, though for himself
what was destined was trouble, and for me unforgettable endless grief over him: he's been gone so long, we can't tell
if he's living or dead! They must be mourning him now-
old Laërtes, prudent Penelope, and Telemachos, still
a newborn child in the house at the time he left"-in whom, so speaking, he stirred the urge to mourn his father. Tears
dropped from Telemachos' eyelids as he heard his father's name,
and with both hands he held his purple mantle up
in front of his eyes. Menelaös took note of what he did, and turned over in his mind and in his heart the thought: should he let the boy mention his father first himself,
or rather question him first, examine him on each matter?
While he was debating thus, in his mind and heart,
Helen came in, from her fragrant high-roofed boudoir, like Artemis of the golden distaff, and with her Adreste, who brought out for her a finely made recliner,
while Alkippe fetched her a rug of the softest wool,
and Phylo a silver basket given her as a present
by Alkandre, the wife of Polybos, who dwelt in Egyptian Thebe, where the richest goods adorn all private homes: he made Menelaös a present of two silver bathtubs,
a pair of tripods, and ten talents of gold.In addition
his wife presented Helen with magnificent gifts:
a golden distaff she gave her, and a work basket on wheels, fashioned of silver, its rims all finished off with gold.
It was this that her handmaid Phylo brought in and placed beside her, full of yarn already spun, and across it
was laid the distaff, loaded with darkly violet wool.
Helen sat down in the recliner, a footstool under her feet, and at once let fly at her husband a row of questions: "Menelaös, nursling of Zeus, do we know who these men are, or say they are, who've come to our house? Shall I
keep quiet or say what I think? Oh, I simply must tell you!
Not once did I ever see such a striking resemblance, in either a man or a woman-it truly astounds me! This boy could be the son of great-hearted Odysseus,
Telemachos, left as a newborn child in the house
by him, when because of me, the bitch, you Achaians
went out against Troy, hearts set on ruthless warfare."
Then fair-haired Menelaös responded to her, saying:
"I too see the likeness now, wife, exactly as you perceive it: such as this boy's were Odysseus' feet and hands,
and the way he'd glance, and his head, and the hair above it!
And when, just now, I was reminiscing about Odysseus, recounting all the sorrows and hardships that he endured on my behalf, the boy shed bitter tears from under
his eyelids, held up that purple mantle before his eyes."
To him Peisistratos, Nestor's son, now responded, saying:
"Atreus' son Menelaös, Zeus' nursling, leader of troops, this youth is indeed his son, exactly as you tell it!
But he's also modest, and personally embarrassed
by the thought of being too outspoken in what he says
before you, whose voice delights us both like a god's.
As for me, the Gerenian horseman Nestor sent me
to be Telemachos' escort, since he was eager to see you,
and hoped you'd give him some encouraging word or action; for many troubles a son encounters at home when his father's
long absent, when he's got no other supporters, as now
it is with Telemachos: his father's away, nor are there
any others among his people who'd stave off trouble from him."
Then fair-haired Menelaös responded to him, saying: "Wonder of wonders! There's come to my house the son
of a man who's my dear friend, who faced much hardship
on my account: when he came home, I figured I'd welcome him more than all other Argives-if we two ever got back over
the sea in our swift ships, thanks to far-seeing Olympian Zeus! I'd have made some Argive town his, built a house there for him,
fetched from Itháke his son, his possessions, all his people-
expelling the population of one of those cities located round about, those that acknowledge me as their ruler. Both living here, we'd have seen a lot of each other: nothing would have kept us apart, away from friendship's pleasures,
until the black cloud of death in the end enfolded us!
But the god himself, I suppose, resented such a prospect, and denied a safe homecoming to that unlucky man alone."
So he spoke, and stirred in them all an urge to lamentation: Argive Helen, daughter of Zeus, shed tears now,
and Telemachos wept, as did Atreus' son Menelaös,
nor could the son of Nestor keep his eyes tearless, as he recalled in his heart the peerless Antilochos,
slain by the bright Dawn's glorious son.So now, thinking of him, he uttered winged words, saying:
"Son of Atreus, old Nestor would always refer to you as the most sagacious of men, when your name came up
in his halls, when questions arose between us: so now, if it's possible, do me a favor! I'm not the sort of man
to hold sad discussions at dinner: next morning's soon enough
for that kind of thing. Of course, I'm not against grieving for any mortal who's died and met his fate:
this is the only due we pay to wretched mortals,
to crop our hair, and let the tears course down our cheeks!
For a brother of mine, too, is dead, one far from the meanest
of Argives-you may well have known him, though I myself
never met nor saw him: still, they say that Antilochos excelled all others both as a runner and as a fighter."
Then fair-haired Menelaös responded to him, saying: "Friend, what you've said is all that any sagacious man
could say or do, even one who was older than you are!
Such a father is yours, as your careful speech makes clear. Easily known is the offspring of that man for whom
Kronos' son spins good fortune in his marriage and his children, as now he has granted Nestor, through all his days,
to reach old age at home in prosperity, with his sons
proving themselves both sharp-witted and expert spearmen. So we'll leave off the weeping that recently took place,
and let's turn our minds back to dinner-let them pour water over our hands! Time enough tomorrow morning
for me and Telemachos to have a full discussion."
So he spoke, and Asphalion poured water on their hands- Asphalion, busy squire of renowned Menelaös. They now reached out their hands to the good things ready for them.
Then Helen, daughter of Zeus, had another idea: at once
into the wine they were drinking she added a drug
that banishes grief and anger, brings oblivion of all ills: whoever swallowed it when mixed into the bowl
would not, for the rest of that day, wet his cheeks with tears, even though his mother and father should lie there dead,
or a brother or dear son should be killed in his presence,
cut down by the sword, and his own eyes witnessed it-
so powerful were the drugs that this daughter of Zeus possessed, benign ones, a present from Thon's wife Polydamna,
a native of Egypt; for there the grain-giving earth bears most
drugs-many healing in mixture, and many malignant:
each man there's a physician, more knowledgeable than all mankind elsewhere, for indeed they are of Paieon's race.
So when she'd added the drug and had the wine poured out, at once she spoke again, and responded to them, saying:
"Atreus' son Menelaös, Zeus' nursling, and you other sons
of excellent sires! Now to one man, now to another
the god, Zeus, gives good or ill, for he can do anything; so feast on, sitting here in our halls at your ease, and enjoy listening to tales: I'll tell one that fits this occasion well!
I can't rehearse or enumerate all the many trials
of steadfast-minded Odysseus, but there is this one exploit, performed and endured by the mighty warrior in
the Trojans' land, where you Achaians endured troubles!
He scourged his own person with harsh unseemly blows,
flung rags about his shoulders to look like a menial,
and slipped into the enemy's wide-wayed city, concealing himself in the likeness of another, a beggar, quite different from the real man at the Achaians' ships.
Thus disguised he entered the Trojans' city, unrecognized
by them all: I alone perceived who he really was,
and questioned him; he in his cunning dodged my enquiries. But after I'd bathed him and rubbed him down with oil,
and put good clothes on him, and swore a mighty oath not to reveal him as Odysseus among the Trojans
until he was safely back to the swift ships and the huts,
then at last he told me all the plans of the Achaians;
and-after he'd killed many Trojans with the keen-edged bronze- got back to the Argives, brought them much information.
The other Trojan women wailed in grief, but my own
spirit rejoiced, since already my heart was set to return
back home, and I groaned for the blindness that Aphrodite had inflicted in leading me there, away from my dear country, abandoning my own child, my bedchamber, my husband- who was lacking in nothing, either brains or looks."
Then fair-haired Menelaös responded to her, saying:
"All this indeed, my wife, you have stated correctly. Long since have I come to know the minds and counsel of many heroic men, and have traveled widely,
but never yet have I met and studied such a person
as steadfast Odysseus was at heart; nor have I known
so striking a deed as that great man devised and achieved in the carpentered Horse, where we-all the very best
of the Argives-sat, bringing death and destiny to the Trojans. You came then-maybe impelled
by a god determined to grant the Trojans some glory-
and godlike Deïphobos along with you. Three times you circled the hollow ambush, tapping its surface, calling out to all the Danaän leaders by name, imitating the voice of each of the Argives' wives.
Now I and the son of Tydeus, with noble Odysseus,
were sitting inside, and could hear the way you were calling. Diomedes and I were both eager to jump from our seats
and emerge, or at least to answer you from inside;
but Odysseus, despite our longing, held us back in place. Then all the Achaians' sons kept silent except for
Antiklos, who was still determined to answer you, had not Odysseus kept his mouth firmly shut
with his great powerful hands, and saved all us Achaians by holding firm until Pallas Athene led you from us."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying: "Atreus' son Menelaös, Zeus' nursling, leader of troops,
so much the worse, for this didn't ward off grim destruction
from him, nor would have done, had his heart within been of iron!
So come now, dispatch us to bed, so that we without delay may settle down and enjoy the pleasures of sweet sleep."
So he spoke, and Argive Helen gave orders to her handmaids to set bedsteads under the colonnade, and lay upon them fine purple wool throws, and over these to spread blankets, topped off with fleecy mantles that would serve as coverlets. Out from the hall went the handmaids, each holding a torch,
and made up the beds. A herald escorted the guests.
They then lay down to sleep there, in the dwelling's forecourt, the hero Telemachos and Nestor's splendid son;
but Atreus' son slept in a back room of the high house,
and by him lay long-robed Helen, resplendent among women.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, Menelaös of the great war cry rose from the bed he'd slept in, put on his clothes, slung a sharp sword from one shoulder, tied on a pair of sandals under his sleek feet,
sallied forth from his chamber, in appearance like a god,
sat down beside Telemachos, and addressed him as follows: 'What need was it brought you here, heroic Telemachos,
to sunny Lakedaimon, over the broad back of the sea? Something public, or personal? Tell me the truth of this."
Sagacious Telemachos answered him: "Atreus' son,
Menelaös, Zeus' nursling, leader of troops, I came
in the hope you might be able to tell me news of my father. My estate is being eaten up and my rich farms ruined,
my house is crowded with foes who continue to slaughter
my flocks of sheep and my crumple-horned shambling cattle-
these arrogant, overweening suitors of my mother!
That's why I'm here at your knees now-you might be willing to tell me about his grim death, if you maybe saw it
yourself, or heard an account of it from some other
wanderer: to unmatched misery his mother bore him!
And don't, from concern or pity, speak false comfort to me, but tell me exactly whatever you may have witnessed!
I beseech you, if ever my father, noble Odysseus, made you any promise, by word or action, and delivered on it
in the land of the Trojans, where you Achaians met grief,
remember it now, and tell me the unerring truth of it."
Deeply troubled, fair-haired Menelaös now addressed him: "I tell you, it was indeed in the bed of a brave warrior
that these fellows, cowards themselves, hoped they might lie!
As when in a thicket, the lair of a powerful lion,
a doe has laid to sleep her newborn suckling fawns, and goes off, traversing foothills and grassy glens in search of pasture, and the lion returns to his den
and on both her fawns unleashes a ghastly fate-just so
will Odysseus unleash a ghastly fate on these men!
How I wish-by Zeus the Father and Athene and Apollo!- that he, as strong as he was that time in well-built Lesbos when he stood up and wrestled a bout with Philomeleides, and threw him down forcefully, and all the Achaians cheered,
might come-he, Odysseus-in such strength among these suitors!
Then they'd all get a swift end and a bitter marriage! As regards the business you're enquiring about, I shan't veer off onto other subjects, nor will I mislead you-
of all that I heard from the forthright Old Man of the Sea
not one word will I keep back or conceal from you!
"Though I longed to return here, the gods still held me back in Egypt, since I'd not offered them adequate sacrifices- gods always want mortals to bear their behests in mind!
Well, there exists an island set in the surging sea,
offshore from Egypt: Pharos, they call it, as far out
as a hollow ship can cover in one whole day
with a tailwind strong and constant blowing behind it; there's a harbor there with good anchorage, where men take on water before sailing out in their trim ships.
There for twenty days the gods stayed me, nor ever did
those maritime tailwinds show up that escort ships safely across the sea's broad back; so all my stores
would have been eaten up, and my crew's strength with them, had not one of the gods shown compassion and rescued me-
the daughter of mighty Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea,
Eidothee: it was her heart I'd stirred in particular when
she encountered me straying alone, far away from my comrades, who'd gone out round the island, engaged in fishing
with bent hooks, since starvation was crimping their bellies.
She it was who approached now, and addressed me, saying:
'Are you just childish, stranger, excessively dim-witted,
or deliberately acting the fool, out of pleasure in suffering?
The way you're stuck on this island, unable to discover any way out, and your men near to despairing!'
"So she spoke; and I then responded to her, saying:
'Let me tell you-whichever goddess it is that you are- that no way am I stuck here by choice: it must be that
I've trespassed against the immortals who hold wide heaven! So tell me-for you gods have knowledge of everything-
which immortal is keeping me here, holding up my journey,
and how I'm to get back home, across the fish-rich sea.'
"So I spoke, and at once she, bright among goddesses, said: 'Well, stranger, I'll give you a full and accurate answer.
There's a certain Old Man of the Sea-he often comes here-
immortal and truthful-Proteus of Egypt, who knows
the depths of every sea, a servant of Poseidon:
they say he's my father, that he begot me. Now if
you could somehow lie in wait and get hold of him, then
he could tell you about your return, the details of your journey,
all your long voyage homeward across the fish-rich sea. What's more, Zeus' nursling, if you wanted, he could relate
what's been done in your halls, for both good and evil, while you were away on your long and arduous journey.'
"So she spoke, and I then made answer to her, saying:
'Show me yourself now how to ambush this old immortal- he might see me beforehand, be alerted, avoid me:
it's hard for a mere mortal to overpower a god.'
"So I spoke, and at once she, bright among goddesses, said: 'Well, stranger, I'll give you a full and accurate answer.
At the time that the sun has risen to span mid-heaven
this truthful Old Man of the Sea emerges from the waves with the breath of the west wind, concealed by a dark ripple. When he's out, he lies down to sleep in the hollow caves, and around him the seals,the sweet sea daughter's brood,
come up out of the grey sea water, fall asleep together,
exhaling a pungent reek of the sea's far-reaching depths.
I'll take you there tomorrow as dawn is breaking
and settle you down in a row-you must carefully choose
three of your comrades, the best in your strong-benched ships-
and tell you about all the tricks of the old man. First,
he'll count the number of seals, go over them all;
but when he's totted them up and reviewed them, then
he'll bed down in the midst of them, like a shepherd among his flock.
Now as soon as you see him settled, then will be the time
to muster up every last drop of your strength and vigor,
and hold him firm, though he'll struggle mightily to escape. He'll test you by turning into every creature that comes forth and moves on the earth, into water, into devouring fire;
yet keep him pinned down, hold on to him all the harder!
But when at last he questions you in his own person,
in that shape he had when you watched him settling down, then, hero, cease your violence, set the old man free,
ask him which of the gods it is that's angry with you
and your homecoming, how you're to traverse the fish-rich sea.'
"That said, she dived down into the surging deep,
and I returned to my ships, drawn up on the beach, my heart brooding darkly on many things as I went. Then, after we'd gone on down to our ship and the sea,
and made ready our meal, and ambrosialnight came on,
we lay down to sleep there, beside the breaking surf.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, then indeed along the strand of the broad-wayed sea I went, praying much to the gods, and taking with me the three comrades I most trusted for every venture.
"She meanwhile had plunged down into the sea's broad gulf
and fetched up from the deep the skins of four seals, all recently flayed: she'd thought up a trick against her father. She dug out hollow forms in the sandy beach, and sat there, waiting. So we came right up to her, and she made us
lie down in a row, threw a skin over each of us. Now
our ambush would have been torture, for most horribly did the vile stench of these brine-bred seals revolt us- who'd choose to bed down beside a beast from the sea?- had she herself not rescued us, devised a great remedy:
she brought and positioned ambrosia under each man's nose,
that breathed sweet fragrance, destroying the sea beast's stink. So all that morning we waited, with enduring patience,
till the seals came crowding up from the water and then settled themselves in lines along the seashore. At noon
the old man emerged from the sea, to find his well-nourished
seals: he inspected them all and checked their number, counting us first among the beasts, never once suspecting the trick we'd played. Then he too lay down to rest.
So we with a shout sprang on him, locked him in our arms;
But the old man hadn't forgotten his own elusive arts,
far from it: first he became a bearded lion,
then a serpent, then a leopard, then a gigantic boar; then he turned into flowing water, and a tall leafy tree;
but with resolute heart we kept him firmly pinned down,
and when the cunning old trickster was at last exhausted
then he finally spoke and questioned me, saying: 'Which
of the gods, son of Atreus, was it advised you how to ambush and catch me against my will? What is it that you want?'
"So he spoke, and I then made answer to him, saying:
'You yourself know, old man-why try to trick me with
this question?-how long I've been stuck here on this island, unable to find a way out, my inner spirit fading: so you
tell me-since gods are all-knowing-which immortal
is it who fetters me here, who's kept me from my journey-
and how I'm to get back home across the fish-rich sea.'
"So I spoke: he at once made answer to me, saying:
'You should have made rich sacrifices to Zeus and the other gods before embarking, to ensure your speedy return
to your own country, voyaging over the wine-dark deep!
For it isn't your fate to set eyes on your friends, or make it
back to your well-set home and your ancestral country before you've once more been to the waters of Egypt's heaven-fed river and offered ample sacrifices
to the immortal gods who hold wide heaven: only
then, at last, will they grant you the journey that you desire.'
"So he spoke; but the heart within me was shattered
by his sending me back again to traverse the misty deep to Egypt, a lengthy and most wearisome journey.
Yet even so I still responded to him, saying:
'All this I shall do, old man, exactly as you bid me.
But come now, tell me this, give me a true report:
Did all the Achaians get home with their ships, unharmed, all those Nestor and I left when we set out from Troy?
Or did any die by some unkind fate on shipboard,
or in their friends' arms, after winding up the war?'
"So I spoke: he at once made answer to me, saying:
'Son of Atreus, why ask me this? It's not your business to know or search out my mind-nor do I think you'll long be tearless when you hear the full account!
For many of them perished, and many were left there, though only two leaders of the bronze-corseleted Achaians
died when returning home, or in the war-you were there then!- and one may still be alive, held back out there on the deep.
Alas I was done for, along with his long-oared vessels:
first Poseidon drove him onto the massive rocks
of Gyrai, yet rescued him, brought him safe from the sea; and he'd have escaped his fate, though hated by Athene,
had he not, infatuate, uttered a reckless boast, asserted that it was in spite of the gods he'd escaped the sea's
great gulf, so that Poseidon, hearing his noisy bragging,
at once took hold of the trident in his mighty fists and struck the rock face of Gyrai, split a part off.
The rock held firm, but the fragment where Aias was perched when he made his reckless boast crashed into the sea,
bore him down with it into the boundless surging main,
so he swallowed his fill of salt water, and thus perished.
'But your brother somehow escaped, eluded the death spirits with his hollow ships: it was the lady Here who saved him. Then, when he was nearing Malea's sheer promontory,
a strong gale took hold of him, carried him headlong
over the fish-rich waters, groaning disconsolately,
to the coast of that land where in time past Thyestes had his abode, but now his son Aigisthos dwelt there.
Yet from this point too an unharmed return was shown him:
The gods changed the gale to a tailwind, and they got home.
Now he, Agamemnon, rejoicing, set foot on his native soil, laid hold of the earth and kissed it, a flood of warm tears streamed down his face, so glad he was to see his homeland.
'But a watch at his lookout saw him, a man brought in
and set there by crafty Aigisthos, who promised him a reward,
two talents of gold: he'd been keeping watch for a year now in case he slipped past unseen, fierce valor not forgotten.
Now the watchman went to the palace, informed the people's shepherd: Aigisthos at once thought up a crafty scheme:
he chose twenty men, the best fighters in the region,
and placed them in ambush, but across the hall laid on
a feast, then took horses and chariots to welcome Agamemnon, the people's shepherd, mind set on treacherous action,
and brought him back, unaware of his coming fate, and after
feasting him killed him, the way you'd butcher an ox at its crib.
Not one of all Atreus' son's comrades remained alive there, not one of Aigisthos' men:they all died in the halls.'
"So he spoke, and the spirit within me was shattered.
And I wept as I sat on the sand there, my heart no longer
wanted to live, to behold the sunlight. But after
I'd had my fill of weeping and groveling, then
the forthright Old Man of the Sea addressed me, saying: 'No longer, son of Atreus, waste time like this in ceaseless weeping: no good will come of it! Rather do all you can
to get back soon to your country: there's always a chance
of finding that man alive still-if Orestes hasn't arrived first and killed him, and you only get there in time for the funeral.'
"So he spoke, and the heart and proud spirit once again were cheered in my breast, despite the grief I felt,
and I spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying:
'These men I know of. But tell me, who's the third man,
the one who may be alive still, held back out there on the main- or is he dead? Though it grieve me, I want to hear the truth.'
"So I spoke: he at once made answer to me, saying:
'That is the son of Laërtes, whose dwelling is in Itháke:
him I saw on an island, shedding copious tears,
in the home of the nymph Kalypso, who by constraint detains him there, so he can't get back to his own country, for he has no ships with oars, nor any comrades
to further his voyage over the broad back of the sea.
But it isn't your destiny, Menelaös, Zeus' nursling,
to die and meet your fate in horse-grazing Argos: rather it's to the Elysian plain and the furthest ends of the earth
that the immortals will bring you, where fair-haired Rhadamanthys
dwells, and where the living is easiest for mankind:
no snow's there, no strong storms, nor ever any rain,
but a constant light western breeze coming up off the ocean to provide mankind with cooling relief; for as they see it, since you have Helen as wife, you're a son-in-law of Zeus.'
"That said, he plunged down into the surging deep;
and I returned to the ships with my godlike comrades, my heart brooding darkly on many things as I went. Then after we'd gone on down to our ship and the sea, and made ready our meal, and ambrosial night came on,
we lay down to sleep there, beside the breaking surf.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, our ships first of all we hauled into the bright salt sea,
and set up the masts and sails in these well-trimmed vessels. Then the men went aboard, and sat down on the benches,
and ranged in close order struck the grey sea with their oars.
So back to Egypt, land of the heaven-fed river, I brought and moored my vessels, and offered most lavish sacrifices; and when I'd appeased the wrath of the gods that are forever I raised Agamemnon a grave mound, that his fame might be
undying. That done, I set sail for home. The immortals
gave me a tailwind, conveyed me to my own dear land. So come now, stay on with me longer here in my halls, for eleven or twelve more days, and after that
I'll arrange you a proper send-off, with some splendid gifts-
three horses, a well-polished chariot. In addition I'll give you a beautiful cup: then, when you pour libations
to the deathless gods, you'll remember me all your days."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"Son of Atreus, please don't invite me to stay here longer!
Truth is, I'd be only too happy to sit on for a full year in your abode here, home and parents all forgotten,
so rare is the pleasure I get from listening to your stories
and the way you tell them! But already my comrades are fretting to leave sacred Pylos, you're keeping me here so long!
As for the present you give me, make that a keepsake:
horses I'll not take back to Itháke, but rather leave them here for your pleasure, since you are lord of a spacious plain with an abundance of clover and galingale,
of wheat and millet and ample-grained white barley.
But Itháke has no broad courses, nor any meadows; it gives
pasture to goats-more attractive than that for horses! None of the islands has meadows or space for chariots: each of them slopes down seaward, Itháke most of all."
So he spoke. Menelaös of the great war cry smiled,
caressed him with one hand, and addressed him, saying:
"The way you talk, dear child, reveals your good breeding! I'll change these presents, then, since I can: of all the gifts laid away in my house as personal treasures I shall
give you the one that's most beautiful and most costly:
a finely wrought mixing bowl, made all of silver throughout,
rims finished off with a golden inlay, the work
of Hephaistos, a present from the hero Phaidimos,
the Sidonians' king, at the time that his house gave me shelter when I'd got that far homeward. This I'd like you to have."
Such were the words they exchanged between one another,
while the banqueters were arriving at the godlike king's domain: they drove up sheep, they brought beneficent wine,
their fine-veiled wives came with them, carrying bread. Thus they busied themselves about the feast in the halls.
Meanwhile the suitors gathered in front of Odysseus' abode
were amusing themselves, in their usual arrogant fashion, by throwing the discus and javelin out on a leveled terrace where Antinoös and godlike Eurymachos were sitting- the suitors' leaders, by far the best-born among them.
They were approached now by Phronios' son Noemon,
who addressed Antinoös, had this question for him:
"Antinoös, do we or don't we know for certain when Telemachos will get back here from sandy Pylos? He went taking a ship of mine, and now I have need of it
to go over to widespread Elis, where I've a dozen
brood mares, now suckling young mules, unbroken, hard workers: I want to drive one off, break it in."
So he spoke. They were quietly astonished, had no idea that Telemachos had gone to Neleian Pylos, believed him
somewhere out in the fields, with his flocks or at the swineherd's.
Antinoös, Eupeithes' son, now responded to him, saying: "When exactly did he leave? And who were those young men that went with him? Select Ithákans, or just his own
field hands and household servants? This too he could have done.
And give me a true answer, I need to be quite certain:
Was it by force, against your will, that he took your black ship, or did you give it him freely because he asked you for it?"
Noemon, the son of Phronios, responded to him, saying: "I gave it him freely myself. What would anyone do
when a man of his sort, with the troubles he has at heart,
made the request? To not give it him would be hard.
As for the youths, those gone with him are Itháke's best after ourselves: I noticed their leader embarking and he was Mentor-or else some god who looked just like him.
It's an odd thing: I saw godlike Mentor here yesterday
at dawn, but in fact he'd left then in the ship to Pylos."
This said, he took himself off to his father's house,
leaving the proud hearts of both highly disconcerted. They at once made the suitors quit their games and sit down,
and among them Antinoös, Eupeithes' son, now spoke,
bitterly troubled, his black heart brimming over
with rage, while his eyes had the semblance of blazing fire. "An outrageous act, I swear, most high-handedly brought off, this trip by Telemachos! And we thought he'd never make it!
Despite all of us here, the brat's gone, just like that-
got a ship, launched it, enrolled the best men we have!
Pretty soon he'll be trouble for us: so may Zeus
destroy his power before he ever comes to full manhood! Come then, give me a fast ship and twenty comrades,
so I can set an ambush, watch for him as he steers
through the narrows between Itháke and sheer beetling Same, and give him a miserable voyage in his quest for his father!"
So he spoke: they all assented, backed his proposal, got up at once, and went off to the house of Odysseus.
Nor was Penelope left for long without knowledge
of the schemes that the suitors hatched in secret discussion, for Medon the herald told her, who, outside the courtyard, heard the whole plot that they, inside, were weaving,
and went in through the hall to inform Penelope of it.
As he set foot across the threshold Penelope addressed him:
"Herald, for what have the lordly suitors now dispatched you?
To tell the household servants of godlike Odysseus
to stop their appointed tasks, and cook up a feast for them?
Would that this, with no prospect of future wooing or meetings
elsewhere, were to be the last and latest dinner
of all you who throng here, gobbling up so much livelihood, the possessions of clever Telemachos! Did you not listen long ago, when you were children, to your fathers' talk
of what manner of man Odysseus was among your begetters,
wronging by deed or word no person in the land, unlike the custom of most of these godlike monarchs,
who hate one man and favor another as they please?
But he never ever treated anyone badly, whereas
your cast of mind and unseemly actions are all too clearly
visible, nor nowadays do past favors reap gratitude."
Medon, astute in counsel, then responded to her, saying:
"My queen, would that this were the worst of all your troubles! But there's something else, more serious and threatening,
that the suitors are planning-Zeus forfend that it come to pass!
They intend to cut down Telemachos with the sharp bronze
on his way home-he sailed away, seeking news
of his father, to sacred Pylos and lordly Lakedaimon."
So he spoke. On the spot her knees and heart gave way, and for long she remained speechless. Both her eyes
brimmed over with tears, and her vigorous voice was stilled.
But at last she framed words again, and addressed him, saying: "Herald, why is my child gone? There was no need for him
to go aboard swift-moving vessels that serve mankind as the sea's horses, crossing wide stretches of the deep!
Is not even his name to survive among mankind?"
Medon, astute in counsel, responded to her, saying:
"I do not know if some god incited him, or it was his own spirit stirred him to go to Pylos, to find out about
his father's homecoming, or what fate he'd met."
With that
he went on his way, out through Odysseus' house; but she
was sunk in heart-crushing anguish, had no more strength to get herself to a chair, of the many in the room, but sank down there, on her richly worked bedchamber's threshold, sobbing piteously, and around her wailed her handmaids,
all of them, young and old, that were there in the house.
After much crying, Penelope now addressed them, saying: "Listen, my friends: on me the Olympian's laid more grief than any woman brought up with me has suffered! Years ago I lost my good husband: a lion's heart he possessed,
and stood out among the Danaäns for every kind of virtue:
a fine man-wide is his fame through Hellas and mid-Argos!
And now the gales have swept my beloved son away without trace from our home: I had no word of his going.
You cruel wretches, not one of you thought to arouse me
from sleep, though you knew very well what was going on
at the time that he went aboard that hollow black vessel!
If I'd only found out that he was planning this journey
he'd either have had to stay here, though longing to be gone, or else he'd have left me a corpse, here in my own halls!
As it is, will someone go quickly and summon old Dolios,
my servant, a gift from my father when first I came here, who tends my orchard of fruit trees. He is to go at once, sit down beside Laërtes, tell him all that's happened-
in the hope that Laërtes will come up with some scheme,
present himself, lamenting, before these folk who are minded
to do away with his stock, and that of godlike Odysseus."
Eurykleia then, cherished nurse, responded to her, saying: "Dear girl, whether you finish me with the pitiless bronze or let me stay in the house here, I shan't conceal the truth.
I indeed knew all this, and gave him all he asked for-
bread and sweet wine. But he made me swear a great oath not to tell you for twelve days at least-or till you yourself
missed him, and heard that he'd gone-so that you would not fall to weeping, and spoil your lovely complexion. So now
go bathe yourself, and change into laundered clothes,
and go upstairs to your room, you and your serving women, and pray to Athene, daughter of Zeus of the aegis: for she might save him hereafter, even from death. But do not further burden that burdened old man-I can't believe
that the line of Arkeisios' son is wholly detested by
the blessed gods: there will surely still be an heir to possess his high-roofed abode, his rich and distant fields."
So speaking she lulled her grief, dried the tears from her eyes.
Penelope went and bathed, changed into clean clothes,
went upstairs to her room, she and her serving women,
put barley grain in a basket, then made her prayer to Athene: "Hear me, unwearying one, child of Zeus of the aegis!
If ever for you in his halls resourceful Odysseus made burnt sacrifice of fat thigh pieces of sheep or oxen,
remember those offerings now, and save my dear son-
fend off these suitors, so haughtily arrogant, from him!' So saying, she keened aloud. The goddess heard her prayer.
The suitors meanwhile raised uproar throughout the shadowy halls, and this is the kind of remark that some arrogant youth would make:
"There's the much-courted queen deciding which of us she'll wed-
not knowing that her son's murder's already been arranged!" So would one speak; but they didn't know what was arranged, or how, and Antinoös now addressed them, saying:
"You idiots, avoid this kind of overconfident chatter
entirely, lest someone report it to those inside!
So now let's get going in silence, and put into action the scheme that we all agreed to."
So he spoke, and picked out the twenty best men: then they together set off to their swift ship on the strand by the seashore.
First of all they hauled the black vessel down to deep water,
then they set up in it both mast and sail, and fitted the oars to their leather thole-straps, all in due order,
and hoisted and set the white sail. Meanwhile their proud attendants carried their gear aboard. They moored the vessel
in deep enough water, then disembarked themselves,
ate their dinner, and waited for the approach of evening.
But she, the prudent Penelope, lay in her upper chamber without any nourishment, tasting neither food nor drink, wondering whether her blameless son would escape
death or be done away with by the arrogant suitors; and just as a lion, when cornered by men, will deliberate
in fear, as they close their deceptive circle around him, so was she worrying until sweet slumber overcame her, and she sank back and slept, and all her joints relaxed.
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another idea: she made a phantom, in form resembling a woman-
Iphthime, the daughter of great-hearted Ikarios, whom Eumelos married, he whose home was in Pherai-
and sent it off to the home of godlike Odysseus, there
to tell Penelope, who still was weeping and wailing,
that she should give over her grief, her tearful lamentation.
Into her room it wafted, round the strap of the door bolt, and stood there above her head, and addressed her, saying: "Are you asleep, Penelope, heart still heavy with grief ?
The gods, the easy livers, won't have it that you should be
weeping and grieving: return home is yet destined for your son, since in the gods' eyes he's no kind of transgressor."
Then prudent Penelope made it this answer, as she slumbered on sweetly, ensconced at the gates of dreams:
"Why have you come here, sister? Never until now
would you visit: the home you live in lies far away. And now you tell me to quit the grieving, the countless agonies that beset me in mind and soul! Years ago
I lost my good husband: a lion's heart he possessed,
and stood out among the Danaäns for every kind of virtue:
a fine man-wide is his fame through Hellas and mid-Argos! And now my beloved son, too, has left in a hollow ship-
a mere child, with no knowledge of hardship or public debate. For him it is that I grieve, even more than for the other:
I tremble for him, I'm afraid of what he might suffer
in the land of those he's gone to, or out on the deep sea. for many ill-wishers are plotting against him, eager
to kill him before he gets back to his own country."
In answer to her the dark phantom now declared:
"Take heart, don't let your mind be overweighed by panic:
a guide goes with him such as other men have prayed to have at their side, since hers is indeed the power-
Pallas Athene! She feels compassion for you in your sorrow. and it's she who has sent me here to bring you this message."
Then prudent Penelope made this reply to her, saying:
"If you're indeed a god, and have heard this word from the goddess, then come tell me the truth about that man of sorrows-
can it be that he's still alive, a witness to the sunlight, or is he already dead, and in Hades' realm?"
The dark
phantom then answered her in these words, saying: "No,
about him I shall tell you nothing plainly as to
whether he lives or is dead. A bad thing, windy chatter." So saying, it slipped out by way of the door bolt into
the draught of the winds. But she, Ikarios' daughter,
started up from her sleep, her heart greatly comforted
that so clear a dream had reached her in the dark of the night.
Now the suitors embarked and sailed the watery routes, plotting sheer murder for Telemachos in their hearts. There's a rocky islet, Asteris, out in the midst of the deep,
halfway between Itháke and rugged Same, not large
but double-harbored, safe mooring for ships; and there the Achaians set up an ambush, and waited for him.


BOOK 5

As Dawn arose from her bed beside illustrious Tithonos, to bring light to the immortals and to mortal mankind,
the gods were taking their seats in assembly, and among them Zeus the high-thunderer, whose power is the greatest.
Athene was speaking, reminding them of Odysseus' many woes,
much concerned by his being in the nymph's home: "Zeus, Father, and you other blessed gods who live forever,
from now on let no kindness or gentleness be displayed
by a sceptered king, let his heart not cherish righteousness-
let him rather be ever harsh, pursue injustice, since
there's nobody now who remembers godlike Odysseus of the people whose lord he was, and kindly as a father! Yet now he's stuck on an island, suffering sore affliction in the nymph Kalypso's abode: she is keeping him there
under duress. He cannot return to his own country,
for he hasn't to hand any oared ships or companions
to carry him on his way across the broad back of the sea;
and now they're determined to kill, on his journey homeward, his beloved son, who'd gone, seeking news of his father,
to sacred Pylos and to splendid Lakedaimon."
Then in answer cloud-gathering Zeus addressed her, saying:
"My child, what's this word that's escaped the barrier of your teeth? Did not you yourself think up the scheme whereby
Odysseus at his homecoming might be revenged on these men?
As for Telemachos, guide him skillfully-you can do this-
so that he gets back unscathed to his native country and the suitors go home frustrated in their intentions."
That said, he addressed himself to Hermes, his dear son: "Hermes, since in general matters you act as our messenger,
go inform the fair-haired nymph of my firm decision
regarding the return of steadfast-minded Odysseus:
he's to travel without the conveyance of gods or mortals, on a tightly lashed raft, and enduring much hardship, making landfall, twenty days on, at rich-soiled Scheria,
country of the Phaiakians, who are close kin to the gods.
They will honor him like a god, most heartily, and send him aboard a ship of theirs to his own native country,
with generous gifts of bronze and gold and clothing,
more than Odysseus could ever have got for himself from Troy
had he, unscathed, brought home his fair share of the spoils.
This is how he's fated to rejoin his own people, come back to his high-roofed abode and his own dear native land."
The guide, the slayer of Argos,did not ignore his words. At once beneath his feet he tied on the fine sandals,
ambrosial, golden, that carried him over the deep
and the boundless earth, as swift as a gale's blast;
and he took the wand with which he entrances the eyes
of those he so wills, while others he'll wake from their sleep.
Holding this, the strong Argos-slayer was airborne, flew
from the high sky over Pieria, swooped down on the sea,
then skimmed over the waves like a shearwater that flies along the fearsome gulfs of the unharvested deep
hunting for fish, and wets its whirring wings in the brine- just so did Hermes traverse that expanse of waves
until he finally reached the far-distant island.
Then he abandoned the violet deep for dry land,
made his way to the great cave where the fair-tressed nymph had her abode, and found her at home. A great fire
was ablaze on the hearth: the fragrance of split cedar
and citron wood burning spread far over the island,
while she, within there, singing in a sweet voice,
went to and fro at the loom, wove with a golden shuttle. Around the cave there flourished woodland in abundance- alder, black poplar, and fragrant cypress-in which
spread-winged birds had fashioned their nesting places:
small horned owls, falcons, and those chattering seabirds, cormorants, that busy themselves far out in deep water. Encircling the hollow cavern there trailed a luxuriant
garden vine, with plentiful ripe grape clusters
and four springs in a row, all gushing forth clear water,
close to each other, yet facing in different directions, and beyond them soft meadows of blossoming violets
and celery: whoever might come there-an immortal, even- would admire the sight, and rejoice in his heart, as now
the guide, the slayer of Argos, stared in admiration. But when
in his heart he'd admired and marveled at everything, then he made his way straight into the spacious cave; nor did she, Kalypso, bright goddess, fail to know him when they met, for gods, being immortal, are not strangers to each other,
even though one may dwell in a home that's far away.
But great-hearted Odysseus he did not find within there, for he, as usual, was seated out on the seashore, weeping, rending his heart with tears and groans and sadness, gazing out through his tears at the unharvested sea.
Kalypso, bright among goddesses, now questioned Hermes,
after settling him down on a brightly gleaming chair:
"Why, golden-staffed Hermes, honored and welcome, are you now visiting me? In the past you've seldom come here.
Say what you want: my heart tells me to do it
if do it I can, and it's something that can be done.
But come with me now, let me offer you entertainment."
So saying, the goddess placed before him a table on which she'd set out ambrosia, and mixed the red nectar for him. So he ate and drank, did the guide, the slayer of Argos;
then, when he'd eaten and stayed his appetite with food,
in response to her question he addressed her as follows:
"Why am I here, you ask me, as goddess to god: I'll give you a full and truthful account, since that is your desire.
Zeus it was told me to come here: I didn't want to.
Who would willingly traverse so much salt water,
an expanse past telling, with no city of mortals near it, men who honor the gods with lavish sacrifices?
But no way can another god negate or circumvent
what Zeus the aegis bearer has set his mind to!
He says there's a man here with you, one more ill-starred
than all other warriors who round about Priam's city battled on for nine years; then in the tenth they sacked it and set off back home, but returning offended Athene,who sent against them a foul storm and surging waves.
Then all the rest of his noble companions perished,
but him the wind and waves bore off and carried hither, and him Zeus now bids you with all speed send on his way, since he's not fated to die here, far from his dear ones,
but it's still his lot to see his friends and come home
to his high-roofed house and his own dear native land."
So he spoke; and Kalypso, bright among goddesses, shivered,
and responded to him with winged words, saying: "Hard-hearted are you gods indeed, and jealous beyond all others,
who resent any goddesses sleeping with mortal men
openly, if they choose one such as their bedfellow!
So it was when rose-fingered Dawn took up with Orion- you easy-living gods resented it, till at last
in Ortygie chaste Artemis, she of the golden throne,
with her painless arrows assailed and killed him;so it was
when fine-tressed Demeter went with Iasion, gave in
to her passion, lay down and mingled with him
in thrice-plowed fallow soil; not long was it before
Zeus learned of it and with his bright bolt hit and slew him. So now too, gods, you resent my having a mortal companion.
Him I saved when he was riding astride the keel,
alone, after Zeus with his bright bolt had struck
and shattered his swift ship out on the wine-dark sea: Then all the rest of his noble companions perished,
but him the wind and waves bore off and carried hither.
To him I gave friendly welcome and comfort, telling him
I would make him immortal and ageless all his days. But since there's no way for another god to negate or circumvent
what Zeus the aegis bearer has set his mind to,
let him go, if that's what he has decided and so commands,
across the unharvested sea! But no way shall I dispatch him,
for I have here no oared ships, nor the crews for them, to send him on his way across the broad back of the sea. Still, I'll be glad to advise him, I'll hold back nothing, to help him get back unharmed to his own country."
Then the guide, the slayer of Argos, responded to her, saying:
"So dispatch him now, and beware of the wrath of Zeus, lest he nurse resentment and rage against you later."
So saying, the mighty slayer of Argos now departed, and she, the queenly nymph, went to great-hearted
Odysseus, after hearing the message Zeus had sent her.
Him she found on the seashore, sitting; nor were his eyes ever wiped dry of tears; sweet life was draining from him
as he yearned to be home, since the nymph no longer pleased him.
Nights indeed he would sleep beside her perforce
in the hollow caverns, the reluctant by the eager,
but all day he'd stay seated there on the stony beach, rending his heart with tears and sighs and sorrows,
and wept as he gazed out over the unharvested deep. Now she, bright among goddesses, stood close and addressed him, saying:
"Ill-fated man, I beg you, weep here no longer, don't let
your life go to waste: I'm now ready to send you on your way! Come, hew long timbers with the bronze, and shape them into a broad-beamed raft, fasten deck planks upon its
topside, to carry you over the misty deep; and I
will stow in it bread and water and bright red wine,
heart-strengthening stuff, to fend off hunger from you; and I'll clothe you well, and send you a good tailwind, to let you get back unharmed to your own country-
that's if the gods wish it, they who hold the broad heavens,
and are stronger than I am both to plan and accomplish."
So she spoke, and noble much-enduring Odysseus shivered, and then responded to her with winged words, saying: "You're planning some other thing, goddess, not my dispatch! On a raft you're bidding me cross the sea's great gulf,
a fearful and perilous venture! Not even the best vessels,
trim and swift, always make it, even when given a tailwind
by Zeus! I'll not board any raft without your declared goodwill, unless you, goddess, agree to swear a mighty oath that this
isn't some bad new trick that you're devising against me."
So he spoke; but Kalypso bright among goddesses, smiled,
and stroked him with her hand, and addressed him, saying: "What a rogue you are, and by no means feeble-minded, that it occurred to you to address me in those terms!
Very well: let earth bear witness, and the wide heaven above,
and the cascade of Styx, the greatest and most dread
of all oaths observed and taken among the blessed gods, that this is no bad new trick that I'm plotting against you; no, my plans and considerations are such as I'd devise
for my own personal use, should such a need come on me.
My intentions are good, and the heart within my breast is not made of iron, but compassionate."
With those words
Kalypso, bright among goddesses, went on ahead,
at a brisk pace, and he followed in the goddess' footsteps.
They came to the hollow cavern, goddess and man together,
and there he settled himself on the same chair from which
Hermes had risen, while the nymph set all kinds of food
before him to eat and drink, such stuff as mortals feed on,
and she herself sat down facing godlike Odysseus,
and her handmaids brought out for her ambrosia and nectar.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them.
But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
Kalypso, bright among goddesses, was the first to speak:
"Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, most resourceful Odysseus,
are you really so set on making your way back home
to your own land at once? Yet I wish you well regardless!
If you only knew in your heart the full measure of trouble
it's your fate to incur before you reach your homeland,
you'd rather stay here with me, and keep this house,
and be immortal, despite your longing to see
your wife, whom you pine for always, day in, day out!
I may indeed rightly claim not to be her inferior
in either figure or stature, since no way is it seemly
for mortal women to rival a goddess in form or beauty."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to her, saying:
"Don't resent this, my lady goddess: I myself know well
that prudent Penelope is in every way less striking
in appearance than you, whether for stature or beauty,
since she's a mortal woman, whereas you're immortal, ageless! Yet even so what I want and yearn for all my days
Is to make it back home, to see the day of my returning!
Though some god may wreck me again on the wine-dark deep, I will endure: the heart in my breast can bear much trouble!
Before now I've suffered much, have labored greatly amid waves and in warfare: to all that let this be added."
So he spoke: the sun went down, and darkness came on.
They repaired to the inmost recess of the hollow cavern and made love with pleasure, clasping each other close.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, Odysseus promptly put on a tunic and cloak, while she,
the nymph, also dressed herself in a long white robe,
fine-textured and beautiful, with an exquisite golden sash about her waist, and placed a veil on her head. She then began to plan the dispatch of great-hearted Odysseus. First she brought him a large axe, well fitted to his grasp,
of bronze, sharp, double-bladed, with its splendid
handle of olive wood firmly attached. She also gave him a finely made adze. Then she led the way
to the far end of the island, where there stood tall trees- alder and poplar, and fir that reached sky-high,
dried out and seasoned, that would ride for him buoyantly.
But when she had shown him where the tall trees grew, Kalypso, bright among goddesses, went back home, while he set himself to fell timber. The work progressed apace: twenty trees he felled, and trimmed them with the bronze,
then skillfully smoothed them, made them true to the line.
Now Kalypso, bright among goddesses, brought him augers: he bored through all the timbers, fitted them to each other, forced home and matched the joints, made them secure with tree nails. Just as wide as the curve of the hull
that a skillful shipwright marks off for a broad-beamed freighter
was the width that Odysseus gave his raft. He fitted deck beams in, matched them firm to the close-set ribs,
working away, and finished with lengthy gunwales. Next he set up a mast and attached a yardarm to it,
and fashioned a steering oar with which to set his course.
Then he fenced the raft overall with osier wattles,
against the waves, and added a bed of brushwood dunnage. Kalypso meanwhile, bright among goddesses, brought him cloth to fashion a sail from: this too he did with skill,
and added tackle-braces and sheets and halyards-
and used levers to shift the raft down to the bright salt deep.
It was now the fourth day, and all his work was finished.
On the fifth, bright Kalypso saw him off from the island
when she'd bathed him and dressed him in fresh-scented garments.
On the raft the goddess put one skin of dark wine,
and another, a large one, of water, along with provisions
in a leather bag-cooked meat in plenty to boost his strength- and raised a good following wind, warm and propitious.
Happily then to the breeze did noble Odysseus spread
his sail as he sat at the steering oar and skillfully
marked off his course;nor did sleep fall upon his eyelids as he steadily watched the Pleiades and late-setting Bootes
and the Bear, which men also know as the Wagon, that circles in the place where it is, and keeps one eye on Orion,
and alone never dips below the baths of Ocean.
Kalypso, bright among goddesses, had instructed him
to keep this star on his left hand as he traversed the deep.
For seventeen days he sailed on over the sea, and on
the eighteenth there showed up the shadowy mountains
of the Phaiakians' land, where it came closest to him,
resembling a shield laid out on the misty sea.
But the mighty Earth-Shaker, coming back from the Aithiopians, saw him far off,from the Solymoi's mountains, visible
sailing over the deep, and waxed wrathful at the sight,
and shook his head, and thus communed with himself:
"Damn it, the gods have certainly changed their minds
as regards Odysseus while I was away with the Aithiopians!
Now he's near the Phaiakians' land, where it's his destiny to escape the great crisis of suffering that's come on him.
Even so, I think I'll yet give him his fill of trouble!"
So saying he gathered the clouds, and roiled up the deep, wielding his trident; he urged on to gale force every last wind in existence, he used the clouds to blot out
both land and sea: nightfall dropped down from heaven,
the east, south, and fierce west winds now drove together, while the skyborne north wind rolled a huge wave before it,
and Odysseus' knees and heart gave way, and deeply shaken he now addressed his own great-hearted spirit: "Ah, wretch that I am, what's my ultimate fate to be?
All that the goddess told me, I fear, is true-
she said that out on the deep, before I reached my homeland I'd get my fill of trouble, and now it's all happening!
Look at the clouds with which Zeus is obscuring the wide heavens, the way he's roiled up the sea, how the blasts
of all the winds drive at me! Now my sheer destruction's
for certain! Thrice and four times blessed those Danaäns
who perished in Troy's broad land, bringing aid to Atreus' sons:
How I wish I too had died then, had met my fate that day
when a mass of Trojans pelted me with their bronze-tipped spears,
battling around the dead son of Peleus! Then
I'd have had proper burial, and from the Achaians renown: whereas now I'm doomed to suffer a most piteous death."
Possibly we have here a survival from a very different variant return route of Odysseus.
As he spoke, a huge wave bore down on him from above, with fearful force, and spun his raft clean around:
far from the raft he fell, the steering oar was torn
from his grasp, the mast cracked in two, hit squarely by a gale-force gust from the winds in wild confusion, so that sail and yardarm fell far off into the deep.
Him the sea long kept submerged, nor was he able
to come up at once from the great wave's onrush: the clothes
that bright Kalypso had given him weighed him down.
He finally reached the surface, spat out the briny
sea water that streamed off his head; yet not even so, for all his exhaustion, did he lose sight of his raft,
but pursued it amid the waves, somehow caught hold of it,
and clambered aboard and clung there, evading death's end, while the great seas bore it onward, this way and that.
As when in autumn the north wind blows thistledown over the plain, and the tufts cling close together,
so hither and thither the winds now carried the raft
over the sea: now south wind would toss it to north
to sweep onward, now east would yield it to west's pursuit.
But Kadmos' daughter caught sight of him, neat-ankled Ino, white goddess, who once was a mortal, and so spoke,
but now in the sea's depths had found honor from the gods.
She pitied Odysseus, so sea-tossed, so racked with troubles,
made her way up like a shearwater from the depths, then perched on the strongly corded raft, and addressed him, saying:
"Poor man, why, pray, does Poseidon the Earth-Shaker
hate you so muchthat he afflicts you with all these troubles?
Yet despite his fury he shan't completely destroy you!
Now: do as I tell you: you seem not lacking in common sense. Strip off those clothes, leave your raft for the winds to play with, and yourself use your arms as a swimmer, strive to make it
to the Phaiakians' land, where your escape is destined!
And come, take this veil, bind it firmly about your body:
It's immortal, so have no fear that you'll come to harm, or perish!
But when your hands grasp the mainland, then untie it and fling it far out into the wine-dark deep,
well away from the land, and yourself turn your back on it."
So saying, the goddess handed over the veil,
and herself plunged back down into the surging deep like a shearwater: the dark wave hid her. Then noble much-enduring Odysseus reflected, and, deeply shaken, now addressed his own great-hearted spirit, saying:
"Alas, I fear some immortal is once more weaving a snare against me, and that's why she told me to leave the raft! I'll not obey her yet: with my own eyes I saw, far distant, that land where she said I'd find my destined safety.
This is what I shall do, and to me it seems my best course:
So long as the timbers hold firm, their joints unbroken, I shall stay put, and endure the troubles that I'm facing; But when the waves have shattered the raft to pieces then I'll swim for it, since there's no better plan."
While thus
he pondered the matter in mind and heart, Poseidon,
the Earth-Shaker, now conjured up a gigantic wave- fearsome and grim, overarching-and launched it at him. As when a gusting wind whisks up a heap of dried-out husks, and scatters some here, some there, just so
the wave strewed the raft's long timbers; and now Odysseus
sat astride one beam, like someone riding a horse, stripped off the garments that bright Kalypso gave him, quickly tied round his body the veil, and flung himself headfirst into the sea, both arms outstretched, prepared
to swim for his life. The mighty Earth-Shaker saw him,
and shook his head, and thus communed with his heart: "So, after all your troubles, go drifting over the deep
until you meet with those men who are Zeus' nurslings! Yet even so I don't think you'll underrate your hardships."
So saying, he whipped up his beautifully maned horses and went on to Aigai, where he has his famed abode.
But Zeus' daughter Athene had a different notion: the other winds she now stopped short in their tracks,
made them all die down and be lulled to sleep, but the swift
north wind she aroused, parting the waves before it,
to let Zeus' scion Odysseus get through to the oar-loving Phaiakians, after escaping death and death's harbingers.
Two nights and two days now over the heaving swell
he pressed on: many times his heart saw destruction ahead.
But when fair-haired Dawn brought the third morning on, then the wind dropped, and there followed a windless calm,
and he sighted land close ahead of him, as he took a quick glance forward, lifted up by a swelling wave.
As most welcome appear to his children renewed signs of life
in a father who's laid on a sickbed, suffering agonies, long wasting away, attacked by some hateful spirit,
but then, oh joy, the gods free him from his illness- so welcome seemed to Odysseus the land and its forest, and he swam on, longing to set foot on solid earth.
But when as close to land as a man's shout carries,
hearing the crash of the breakers against the reefs-
for the huge wave thundered as it smashed into dry land, roaring terribly: all around was misted in salt sea spray,
and there were no harbors to dock ships, no roadsteads either,
nothing but jutting headlands, and reefs and rocks-
then the knees and heart of Odysseus gave way together, and deeply shaken he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit: "Oh no, now Zeus has granted me an unlooked-for
glimpse of dry land, and I've plowed my way through this gulf,
no way of escape can I see from the grey brine, for offshore
are sharp rocks, and all around them the waves surge up roaring, the cliff-face towers sheer above them; the seawater runs deep close in to land, so there's no way to stand firm
on both feet and escape destruction: I fear as I'm coming ashore
some huge wave may scoop me up and dash me against
a sharp rough rock, putting paid to all my efforts.
But if I swim further along, to see if I maybe can find
bays where the waves strike aslant, or safe harbors from the sea, I'm afraid that the storm winds may snatch me up once more,
and bear me back, groaning heavily, over the fish-rich deep,
or a marine divinity may send some huge monster against me out of the sea, one of many that famed Amphitrite breeds- for I know how deeply the famed Earth-Shaker hates me."
While he brooded upon these matters in mind and spirit
a great wave flung him forward against the rocky shoreline.
There would his bones have been crushed and his skin ripped off had not grey-eyed Athene, the goddess, put a thought in his mind: with both hands, plunging forward, he seized the rock,
and clung to it, gasping, while the great wave rushed by.
Thus this one he dodged, but its backwash caught and struck him
and carried him off, flung him far out to sea.
Just as an octopus, when dragged up out of its lair, will have clusters of pebbles sticking fast to its suckers,
so from his powerful hands against the rock were scraps
of skin stripped off as the great wave went over him.
Beyond his fate, then, surely would wretched Odysseus have died, had not grey-eyed Athene sharpened his wits. Coming up out of the surge as it discharged on the shore he swam outside, eyeing the land, to see if he could find
bays where the waves struck aslant, or safe harbors from the sea.
But when, as he swam, he came on the mouth of a flowing river, this struck him as the best possible place,
being free of stones, and well sheltered from the wind. He recognized the live current, and made a silent prayer:
"Hear me, lord, whoever you are, and to me most welcome:
from the deep I come to you, fleeing Poseidon's threats-
Sacrosanct, even to the immortal gods, is that man who comes as a wanderer, as I come now to your current, and to your knees, after many hardships:
So pity me, lord: your suppliant I hereby declare myself."
Thus he spoke; at once the god stopped flowing, checked the waves, created a calm before him, brought him safe and sound
to the river's mouth. Both knees now lost their strength
and his strong hands too: the salt deep had crushed his spirit,
all his flesh was swollen, seawater oozed in streams
out through his mouth and nostrils. Breathless, speechless he lay, barely stirring: dire exhaustion had overcome him.
When he got his breath back, and the heart revived in his breast, he then unwound the goddess' veil from his body
and dropped it into the seaward-flowing river. A great
wave now carried it back downstream, and Ino quickly gathered it into her hands. Odysseus turned from the river, collapsed in the reeds, and kissed the grain-giving earth.
Deeply shaken he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
"Ah, what must I suffer? What's my ultimate fate to be?
If I keep watch here by the river all the irksome night
I'm afraid the hard frost and the chilly dew between them, because of my weakness, may quell my gasping spirit- and the breeze off the river blows cold before the dawn.
But if I climb the slope to the shadowy forest
and lie down among the dense thickets, then even if cold and exhaustion don't touch me, and I enjoy sweet sleep, I fear I may end as the spoil and prey of wild beasts."
As he reflected, it struck him this last was the best course.
He set off into the maquis and found what he wanted near
the water, beside a clearing. He crept in under two bushes, evergreen thorn and wild olive, that grew from the same spot. Through these the damp winds' violence could never blow, nor the rays of the bright sun penetrate, nor storms
of rain pierce their defenses, so densely they grew,
interlaced the one with the other. In under these Odysseus crept, and with his hands briskly swept
a wide bed of leaves together. Dried fallen leaves were there in abundance, enough to give shelter to two or three men
in the winter season, however severe the weather.
Seeing this, much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced:
he lay down in the middle, heaped fallen leaves over him.
As a man hides a smoldering log under dark embers
far out in the countryside, a man who has no neighbors,
to save a seed of fire, and not need to rekindle it, so Odysseus piled leaves over himself, and Athene
shed sleep on his eyes, to free him as soon as might be from toilsome exhaustion, wrap his eyelids in darkness.


BOOK 6

So Odysseus slept on there, godlike and much-enduring, worn out by exhaustion and hardship; and meanwhile Athene went off to the district and city of the Phaiakians, who
at one time made their home in spacious Hypereia,
and were neighbors to the Kyklopes, rough arrogant men,
who kept raiding them, and were more powerful. Godlike Nausithoös then uprooted them, led them to Scheria, remote from bread-eating mortals, settled them there.
He ran a wall round the city, constructed houses,
made shrines for the gods, shared out the arable acres.
But by now he'd succumbed to his fate, gone down to Hades, and Alkinoös was the ruler, who had wisdom from the gods. To his dwelling now went the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, with her plan for great-hearted Odysseus' return home.
She entered the ornate bedroom in which there slept a girl
most like the immortals in form and appearance: Nausikaä, daughter of great-hearted Alkinoös, with close by her
two handmaids, made beautiful by the Graces, one on each side of the doorposts; and the bright doors were shut.
Like a breath of wind she now swept in to the girl's bedside,
and stood above her head, and addressed her, assuming the form of the daughter of Dymas, famous for his ships- a girl Nausikaä's age, and very dear to her heart.
In her likeness grey-eyed Athene spoke to her, saying:
"Nausikaä, how could your mother have so careless a child?
Your bright smart clothes are all lying about uncared-for,
yet your marriage is near, when you'll need fine clothes for yourself, and garments, too, to provide for those who'll escort you.
This is the kind of thing that gets you well spoken of
among men, and pleases your father and lady mother!
So let's go and do the washing tomorrow at daybreak: I'll come with you as helper, let you make yourself ready as soon as may be: you won't be unmarried much longer! Already suitors are courting you, the noblest Phaiakians
in these parts-and you share their lineage! So come now,
urge your far-famed father, first thing this morning, to have mules and a wagon ready, to carry for you
the sashes and robes and bright coverlets. And for yourself it's much better to travel this way than to go by foot:
the washing troughs are a long way distant from the city."
That said, the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, departed
for Olympos, where, they say, the gods have their abode forever immovable, never shaken by gales nor wet
with rain, nor does snow ever visit them; the sky
stretches dazzling and cloudless, the upper air gleams white.
The blessed gods find enjoyment here all their days,
and here the grey-eyed one went, after speaking with the girl.
Now Dawn on her fine throne arrived, and woke up the latter, the finely robed Nausikaä. She at once, amazed by her dream,
went off through the house to report it to her parents,
her own dear father and mother. She found them in:
her mother sitting there at the hearth with her handmaids, spinning sea-purple yarn on a distaff; her father she caught on the point of leaving to join the distinguished elders
in council, summoned there by the lords of Phaiakia.
She went up to her dear father, and addressed him thus:
"Dear Papa, won't you please have a wagon made ready for me- the high one, with good wheels, so I can take the fine
clothes that are lying here soiled to the river for washing?
For you too it's proper, when you're with the chief men
debating in council, to be wearing fresh-laundered clothes, and you've five sons living with you, here in your halls, two married, but three lively bachelors, who always
insist on having fresh-laundered clothes to put on
for going to the dance: all this now needs my attention."
So she spoke, too embarrassed to mention lusty marriage
to her father; but he understood all, and responded, saying: "I begrudge you neither the mules, child, nor anything else, so off you go: the servants will ready the wagon for you-
the high one, with good wheels, and fitted bodywork."
With that he called to the servants, and they obeyed him. They made ready the good-wheeled mule wagon outside,
and brought the mules, and yoked and harnessed them, while the girl fetched out the bright garments from indoors,
and stowed them away in the polished cart, and her mother
added a box full of satisfying things to eat- appetizers galore, and poured out a measure of wine in a goatskin bottle. Nausikaä boarded the wagon,
and her mother gave her a golden flask full of soft oil, with which
she and her handmaids could massage themselves.She now
took hold of the whip and the brightly polished reins,
and whipped up the mules to start them. They clattered off at a smart trot, not pausing, with girl and laundry aboard- not alone, for her handmaids all came along with her.
When they reached the sweet flow of the river, at the site
of the regular wash troughs-always enough clean water from springs there or outflow to clean the dirtiest garments-
then they unhitched the mules, set them free from the wagon, and shooed them off along the bank of the eddying river
to graze on honey-sweet clover, while they themselves
took armfuls of clothes from the wagon to the dark water
and trod them out in the basins, fast-moving, competitive. Then after they'd washed them and got them clean again they spread them in rows on the shoreline, where the surf
beating upon the strand had most clearly scoured the pebbles.
Then they bathed, and rubbed themselves down with oil,
and ate their lunch beside the banks of the river
while waiting until the clothes dried off in the bright sunlight.
When the handmaids and Nausikaä had eaten their fill
they then threw off their veils and turned to playing ball,
and white-armed Nausikaä was their leader as they sang. Just as the archer Artemis roams across mountain ranges- lofty Taÿgetos, say, or Erymanthos-exulting
in her pursuit of wild boar or of the swift-footed deer,
and country nymphs, daughters of Zeus the aegis bearer,
join the sport with her, and Leto rejoices at the sight of Artemis, head and brow higher than all the others,
and easily recognized, though each one is beautiful:
so amid all her handmaids shone out this unwed maiden.
But when she was on the point of starting back homeward,
with the mules yoked up and the fine clothes folded, then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another idea:
that Odysseus should wake, and see the sweet-faced girl, and that she should escort him to the Phaiakians' city.
So when the princess next tossed the ball to a handmaid
she missed the handmaid, and sent it into a deep eddy. They all cried out at length, and noble Odysseus awoke, and sat up, wondering in his mind and heart: "Ah me, among what sort of mortals have I now made landfall?
Are they wild and outrageous, men with no sense of justice,
or hospitable to strangers, a god-fearing people? An outcry of women-young girls-just echoed round about me:
the nymphs, it could be, who haunt the sheer mountain peaks and the rivers' springs and the grassy meadows! Or am I
somewhere near talking humans? Well, come on now,
let me take a look for myself, see what I can discover."
That said, godlike Odysseus came out from under the bushes. Strong-handed, he broke off a leafy branch from the dense maquis to cover his body, hide the male parts. He came forth
like some mountain-bred lion, confident in his strength,
who, beaten by wind and rain, still advances, both his eyes ablaze, as in among cattle or sheep he hastens, or in pursuit of wild deer: his ravenous belly drives him
to go after the flocks even inside the close-walled farmstead.
So Odysseus was set to mingle,though naked, among these
fair-tressed young girls: such need had come upon him.
A terrifying sight they found him, all crusted with dried brine, and they scattered in panic around the jutting sand-spits.
Alkinoös' daughter alone stood firm, for Athene had put
courage into her heart, and purged the fear from her limbs.
She stood still, holding her ground. Odysseus debated-should he clasp the knees of this good-looking girl when making his plea,
or should he stay put, just cajole her with honey-sweet phrases so she'd give him clothes, show him the way into town?
As he thus reflected, he decided that it would be better
to stay put, just cajole her with honey-sweet phrases- the girl might take offense if he grabbed her knees!
So he made an impromptu speech, both honey-sweet and crafty: "By your knees I entreat you, lady-some goddess are you,
or mortal? If a goddess, one of those who hold broad heaven,
then to Artemis, great Zeus' daughter, I find you most nearly akin in beauty and height and carriage; but if
you're mortal, one of those who dwell here on earth, then thrice blessed indeed are your father and the lady your mother,
thrice blessed your brothers! Greatly warmed with pleasure
must their hearts always be on your account, as they see so fine an offshoot taking her place among the dancers!
But blessed at heart, far above all others, is he
who'll dower you with bride-gifts and lead you to his home!
Never before have my eyes seen a mortal such as you are,
either man or woman: I'm awed at the sight of you!
On Delos once, beside Apollo's altar, I saw
something like you: a young palm-shoot springing up- I put in there, along with a crowd of followers,
on the same journey fated to bring me such misfortune-
and likewise at that sight I was long in awe,
since never before had such a tree sprung from earth!
Just so, lady, I'm awed and amazed by you, and greatly
fear now to touch your knees. Much hardship has assailed me:
for twenty days-until yesterday, when I got clear
of the wine-dark sea-the waves and storm winds bore me away from the isle of Ogygia. Now some god's landed me here,
I guess, to suffer more trouble, for I don't suppose
it'll stop now: the gods have plenty in store for me still.
So, lady, show me compassion: after all my suffering
you're the first person I've met-not a single other one
do I know of all those who possess this city and this country. Just show me the way into town, give me some rag to wear- maybe you had a wrapper for the clothes you brought here?-
and may the gods grant you all that your heart desires,
husband, home, and like-mindedness-a precious gift, for there's nothing greater or better, ever, than when two
like-minded people are keeping house together,
a man and his wife: much frustration for their ill-wishers, much joy for their friends, but they two know it the best."
Then white-armed Nausikaä made him this answer: "Stranger, you seem neither malicious nor witless: but it's Zeus,
the Olympian in person, who bestows good fortune on men, the good and the bad, to each as he wills; I suppose
he chose this lot for you, and you just have to bear it.
But now, since it's our land and city that you've come to, you'll not go short of clothing nor of anything else
that befits a long-suffering suppliant on arrival.
I'll show you the way into town, name the inhabitants: it's the Phaiakians who possess this land and city,
and I am the daughter of great-hearted Alkinoös,
in whom the Phaiakians' power and might are vested."
That said, she snapped out orders to her fair-tressed handmaids: "Come back here, girls! Scuttling off when you see a man?
Do you really suppose he's some kind of enemy?
There's no mortal alive, nor could there ever be one, who'd show up in this land of Phaiakian men
with hostile intent, so dear are we to the immortals! Remote is our dwelling, far off in the surging deep;
none further distant, other mortals don't mix with us.
No, this is some ill-starred drifter who's ended up here, and we must now take care of, since from Zeus are all strangers and beggars: any gift, though small, is welcome. So come, girls, provide this stranger with food and drink,
and wash him off in the river, well sheltered from the wind."
So she spoke. They stopped, and encouraged one another, and brought Odysseus to shelter, just as Nausikaä, daughter of great-hearted Alkinoös, had told them to do,
and put beside him a mantle and tunic to wear, and gave him
the golden flask containing soft liquid olive oil,
and offered to wash him off in the flow of the river.
Then godlike Odysseus addressed the handmaids, saying: "Handmaids, stand further off, leave me on my own
to scrub off the brine from my shoulders, rub myself over
with oil-indeed it's a long time since oil came near my skin.
I'm not going to bathe in your presence: I feel embarrassed to be naked among all you fair-tressed young ladies."
So he spoke. They went back, told Nausikaä what he'd said.
Now godlike Odysseus scrubbed off with river water
the brine encrusting his back and his broad shoulders,
and wiped the unharvested sea's scurf from his head;
then when he'd washed all over, and rubbed himself with oil, and had put on the clothes that the unwed girl provided, then Athene, offspring of Zeus, made him in appearance
taller and stronger, made the hair spring from his head
in rich curls, like the flower of the hyacinth. As when a man overlays silver with gold, a skillful artisan who's been taught every craft by Hephaistos and Pallas Athene,
and thus turns out the most elegant handiwork,
such was the grace she shed upon his head and shoulders.
Then he took himself off, sat down on the seashore agleam with beauty and grace: the girl stared, awestruck, and addressed her fair-tressed handmaids, saying: "Listen, my white-armed handmaids: let me tell you something!
Not without the gods' will-all the gods who hold Olympos-
has this man come here to mingle with the godlike Phaiakians! Before, he seemed to me to be mean and shabby,
whereas now he resembles the gods who possess broad heaven! If only a man such as this could be chosen as my husband-
could be domiciled here-might even want to stay here!
But come, girls, provide the stranger with food and drink."
So she spoke, and they readily heard and obeyed her, and set before Odysseus both food and drink. So now
the much-enduring godlike Odysseus both ate and drank,
ravenously, since he'd gone a long time without food.
Now white-armed Nausikaä had one more thought. She folded the clothes, and stowed them in the beautiful wagon,
and yoked the hard-hoofed mules, and climbed aboard herself. Then she called out to Odysseus, addressed him directly:
"Get up now, stranger, and I'll guide you to town, direct you
to my wise father's house, where, I promise you, you'll make the acquaintance of all the best of the Phaiakians.
But be sure to do as I say-and you don't strike me as witless.
As long as we're out in the countryside, fields and farmland,
come briskly along with my girls behind the mules
and wagon; I'll lead the way. But when we're about to enter the cit-there's a high wall round it, a fine
harbor on either side of the city, with a narrow entrance, and trim vessels are moored all along the way, each one
with a slip of its own, private docking for everyone;
there too is the place of assembly, by Poseidon's fine precinct, marked out with great deep-bedded quarried stones,
and it's there that they busy themselves with the black ships' tackle, their cables and sails, and there that they trim their oar blades;
for bows and quivers are not the Phaiakians' concern,
but ships' masts, oars, and the trim vessels themselves, in which with delight they traverse the sea's grey waters.
It's their rude comments I want to avoid, the chance that later some man may blame me-there are unkind folk among us-
and one of the nastier sort might say if he met us:
'Who's this tall handsome stranger tagging after Nausikaä? Where did she pick him up? Her husband-to-be, no doubt! Some stray off a ship she'll be bringing in, I suppose,
from a foreign crew-there aren't any from hereabouts-
unless some god's come down from heaven in answer
to her endless prayers, and she'll keep him around for life! Better, if she herself went off and found a husband elsewhere, since she despises these men here in the district,
though many top-class Phaiakians are courting her.' So they'll say,
and such remarks would attach a scandal to my name.
I too would disapprove if another girl behaved thus- one that in defiance of her dear father and mother
consorted with men before reaching the day of public marriage.
So, stranger, quickly grasp what I'm telling you, to ensure
prompt assistance from my father in getting you back home. You'll find a fine grove of Athene near the road, a grove
of poplars; a spring gushes up in it, there's a meadow round it. That's where my father's estate is, his flourishing orchard-
as far from town as the shout of a man will carry.
Sit down there and wait a while, long enough for us to get to the city, arrive at my father's house. But when
you reckon we've made it home, then yourself go on to the city of the Phaiakians, and ask around
where you can find the house of great-hearted Alkinoös.
It's easily recognized-even a child could guide you,
the merest infant, since the other Phaiakians' houses aren't built on a scale to match the abode of heroic
Alkinoös! Then, when you reach that the house and courtyard, go quickly through the main hall, until you come upon
my mother-you'll find her sitting in firelight by the hearth,
spinning sea-purple yarn on a distaff, a wonderful sight, leaning against a pillar, her maids seated behind her; and there is my father's throne, set close by her side, where he sits and drinks his wine like an immortal.
Go on past him, throw your arms round the knees
of my mother, if you're to get a quick and happy glimpse
of your day of homecoming, no matter how far you've come: it's if she looks on you with favor in her heart
that there's hope for you of seeing your people, of getting
back to your own strong house and your native country."
So saying, she lashed out with her shining whip at the mules, and they quickly took off, away from the flowing river:
they trotted well, well did they ply their feet, and she drove taking good care that Odysseus and her handmaids
could keep up on foot, used her whip very sparingly.
As the sun set they reached the famous grove, sacred to Athene. Here godlike Odysseus sat himself down,
and at once made his prayer to great Zeus' daughter: "Hear me, unwearying child of Zeus of the aegis! Listen now,
as you failed to listen before when I was stricken,
when the far-famed Earth-Shaker struck me! Grant that now when I come among the Phaiakians I'm befriended and pitied."
So he spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, but did not yet show herself to him, for she respected
her father's brother, who continued to rage against
godlike Odysseus until he got back to his own country.


BOOK 7

So while Odysseus prayed there, godlike and much-enduring, the strength of her two mules bore the girl back to town.
When she arrived at her father's renowned abode
she pulled up in the forecourt. Her brothers, men like immortals,
came out, crowded round her, unyoked the mules
from the wagon, carried the laundry indoors, while she herself went to her room. There a fire was lit for her by
an old crone from Apeire, her chambermaid, Eurymedousa. Long ago the trim ships had brought her back from Apeire,
and they'd chosen her as a prize for Alkinoös, since he ruled
over all the Phaiakians: the people obeyed him like a god. She'd reared white-armed Nausikaä in his halls; now it was she who lit her a fire and made ready her supper in her room.
Then Odysseus got up to go to the city, and Athene,
wishing him well, shed a thick mist round about him,
so that no great-hearted Phaiakian whom he encountered should address him in uncivil terms, ask who he might be; then, when he was about to enter the pleasant city,
the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, met him, in the guise
of a young virginal girl with a pitcher. She stopped before him,
and godlike Odysseus questioned her, saying: "My child, could you not guide me to the house of a man by name Alkinoös, who's the ruler among the people here?
I'm a long-suffering stranger, come from a remote
and far-off country, so I possess no knowledge
of the people who occupy this city and its land."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him, saying: "Yes, stranger, father, I can show you the house you want, for this man's the neighbor of my own illustrious father!
Just keep silent and follow where I lead the way-
Don't catch anyone's eye, or ask them questions,
for the folk hereabouts have little patience with strangers, and are short on welcome for those from another country. They rely on the swiftness of the racing vessels in which
they traverse the sea's great gulf, a gift from the Earth-Shaker:
their ships contrive all the speed of a wing or a thought."
Having said this, Pallas Athene then led the way briskly, and he followed in the goddess' footsteps.
Nor did the Phaiakians, famed for their ships, observe him
going through the city among them; fair-tressed Athene,
dread goddess, did not allow it: she shed a marvelous
mist over him, out of the kindness she bore him in her heart. Odysseus gazed in wonder at the trim ships and the harbors, the heroes' assembly places, the city walls long and high
and fitted with palisades, a marvelous sight to behold.
When they arrived at the king's magnificent dwelling the first to speak was the goddess, grey-eyed Athene:
"Here is the house, stranger, father, that you asked me to show you!
You'll find Zeus' nurslings, the princes, right inside there
eating their dinner. Go in, and don't let your heart
show alarm: a man whose every move speaks boldness
does better, even supposing he comes from some other country. The first person you'll met in the great hall is its mistress:
Arete's the name by which she's known, and she comes
of the very same stock that bred Alkinoös, the king.
Nausithoös first Poseidon, the Earth-Shaker, sired on Periboia, a woman of matchless beauty,
the youngest daughter of great-hearted Eurymedon, who once ruled as king over the arrogant Giants,
but destroyed his reckless people and was destroyed himself.
With her Poseidon lay in love and begot a son,
great-hearted Nausithoös, who ruled the Phaiakians, and Nausithoös sired Alkinoös and Rhexenor.
Apollo, the silver-bowed, struck Rhexenor down
while a sonless bridegroom, who left one daughter only,
Arete: her Alkinoös took as his wife, and honored as no other woman upon this earth is honored
of all those who run their households subject to men, so honored at heart is she, and ever has been,
by her dear children and by Alkinoös himself,
and by the people, who look upon her as a goddess
and so greet her when she goes abroad through the city; for she herself is in no way lacking in judgment
and settles disputes with goodwill, even those between men.
So if she's well disposed toward you, then there's a chance
that you'll get to see your own people, make it back home to your high-roofed house and your own native land."
So saying, grey-eyed Athene now departed, over
the unharvested sea, took off from delightful Scheria
and came to Marathon and wide-streeted Athens,
and entered the close-set house of Erechtheus. But Odysseus went to Alkinoös' splendid abode. Much his heart pondered as he stood there, even before he reached its brazen threshold, for there was a radiance as of the sun or the moon
over the high-roofed home of great-hearted Alkinoös.
Bronze walls stretched this way and that to the inmost room from the threshold, framed by a cobalt frieze; golden doors safeguarded the close-built inner domain, with silver doorposts set in a threshold of bronze,
and silver the lintel above, and of gold the door-latch.
On either side of each door stood gold and silver dogs
created with consummate skill by Hephaistos and set there to keep watch over the house of great-hearted Alkinoös: immortal creatures and ageless all their days.
Inside, chairs were set on both sides along the wall
from the threshold through to the inmost chamber, and on them
were laid soft, fine-woven covers, the work of women, and here it was that the Phaiakian leaders would sit, drinking and eating: unfailing abundance was theirs.
Youths made of gold there were too, standing on solid
pedestals, who held blazing torches in their hands
to light up the night for those at dinner in the great hall. And there were fifty house slaves there in the hall, women, of whom some were grinding yellow grain in a mill
and others weaving on looms or twirling the distaff
as they sat there like a tall aspen's flickering leaves; and from the close-woven fabrics dripped the soft oil.
For just as Phaiakian men were skilled above all others
at steering a swift ship over the deep, so too their women
were expert weavers: Athene had given them unsurpassed
understanding of exquisite handiwork, and clever minds. Outside the courtyard, close to the doors, was a large four-acre orchard, with a hedge in place all round it:
there fruit trees flourished, luxuriant and tall,
pears, pomegranates, ripe-fruited apple trees,
sweet fig trees and abundantly fertile olives.
The produce of these never failed or perished, either in winter or summer, but lasted throughout the year:
some fruits the west wind's breeze grew, others it ripened;
pear mellowed upon pear here, apple on apple,
grape cluster upon cluster, fig upon fig. There too was rooted a vineyard, richly productive, of which
one part was a warm sun-trap on level ground for drying, while clusters elsewhere were being culled at vintage
or trodden; and grapes still unripe, out in front, were either
shedding their blossom or darkening to purple. There too, by the last row of vines, grew well-planned vegetable beds of every variety, bright green the whole year through;
and there were two springs, one discharging its water over
the whole garden, the other rising by the courtyard threshold
toward the high house. From this the townsfolk drew their water. Such were the gods' fine gifts in Alkinoös' domain.
Much-enduring godlike Odysseus stood there and gazed;
But when in his heart he'd marveled at everything, then
he quickly stepped over the threshold and into the building,
where he found the Phaiakians' leaders and counselors pouring libations from their cups to Argos' far-sighted slayer,
to whom they would pour the last drink when thinking of bedtime.
Much-enduring godlike Odysseus went through the hall, concealed
by the thick mist that Athene had earlier shed around him
till he came to where Arete was, and the king Alkinoös. About the knees of Arete, Odysseus now threw his arms, and then at once the divine mist lifted from him,
and all in the hall fell silent at the sight of the man, and they
stared at him in amazement as Odysseus made his appeal:
"Arete, godlike Rhexenor's daughter, after much hardship I come as a suppliant to your husband and your knees-
and to those dining here-may the gods grant them plenty
in this life, and may each of them bequeath to his children
the wealth in his halls, and all honors his people gave him!
I beg you, give me an escort to get to my own country,
and soon: I've long suffered much, far from my dear ones."
So saying, down he sat at the hearth, among the ashes close by the fire. They all were hushed and silent. At last
there spoke among them the elderly hero Echeneos,
a man who'd seen more years than any Phaiakian,
well skilled at speaking, well versed in ancient wisdom: he with good intent now addressed the assembly, saying: "Alkinoös, this is not the best way, nor is it seemly, to let
a stranger sit on the ground, at the hearth among the ashes-
but people are holding back, awaiting your word! Come then, raise the stranger up, and give him a silver-studded
chair to sit on, tell the heralds to mix more wine that we may pour libations to Zeus, hurler of bolts,
the protector of sacrosanct suppliants! And also let
the housekeeper give this stranger dinner from her store."
When Alkinoös, princely in power, heard these words, he took the wise, subtle-minded Odysseus by the hand, and raised him up from the hearth, and seated him on a shining chair-
making his son get up, the kindly Laodamas,
who sat next to him, and was the one whom he loved best. A maid brought hand-washing water in a fine golden pitcher, and poured it into a silver basin, so he
could wash, and drew up a polished table beside him.
The respected housekeeper brought and set out bread,
with many side dishes, giving freely of her supplies. Much-enduring and godlike Odysseus drank and ate. Then Alkinoös, princely in power, said to the herald: "Pontonoös, mix a bowlful, serve wine to all in the hall,
that we may pour libations to Zeus, hurler of bolts,
the protector of sacrosanct suppliants!"
So he spoke, and Pontonoös came and mixed the mind-honeyingwine
and served it to all, with first drops for libation. But when they'd made libation and drunk as much as the heart desired,
Alkinoös then addressed them, speaking as follows:
"Listen, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians, while I tell you what the heart in my breast dictates. Now that you've dined, go home and get your rest:
tomorrow, early, we'll summon more of the elders,
welcome this stranger here in our halls, and offer choice sacrifice to the gods. Then we'll further consider
the matter of his conveyance, how without toil or trouble, carried by us, he's to reach his native country-
however far distant that may be-soon and rejoicing;
nor on the way shall he suffer any harm or setback until he sets foot on his own land-although thereafter
he'll suffer whatever his fate and the weighty Spinnershave spun with his birth-thread right from the moment his mother bore him! But if he's some kind of immortal, come down from heaven,
then this is a new gambit of the gods' contriving, since
always till now they've appeared to us plainly manifest whenever we offer them our most lavish sacrifices,
and they feast among us, sitting where we sit ourselves.
What's more, if a solitary traveler should meet them on the road
they don't use disguise, since we're close kin to them,
like the Kyklopes or the wild tribes of the Giants."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Alkinoös, don't let that bother you: I am not in any way like the immortals who hold the broad heavens, either
physically or in nature: I look, and am, mortal, a man!
Whoever you know of mankind that shoulder the heaviest load of grief, to them I might liken myself in my sorrows-
and indeed I could tell a yet longer tale of all
the troubles I've endured by the will of the gods!
But first let me eat some dinner, grieving though I am:
for nothing exists more shameless than one's loathsome belly, that forces a man to take notice of it at need, however distressed he may be and stricken by grief at heart,
as I am grief-stricken at heart now; yet still unremittingly
it commands me to eat and drink, forces me to forget
everything I have suffered, insists on being refilled!
But will you please make haste, at daybreak's first appearance, to set me, the ill-starred one, on the road to my own country after all my troubles: let life leave me, once I've seen
my possessions, my servants, and my great high-roofed house."
So he spoke: they all applauded and approved the dispatch
of the stranger, since his request had been properly presented. When they'd made libation and drunk as much as the heart desired, they went, each man to his home, to get their repose;
and godlike Odysseus was left there in the hall
with Arete and godlike Alkinoös sitting beside him,
while the maidservants cleared away the remains of dinner.
Then white-armed Arete was the first to speak, for she had recognized his mantle and tunic at first sight
as fine clothes she herself and her serving women had made;
so now she spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Stranger, this question I'll ask first myself: Who are you,
and from where? Who gave you these clothes? Did you not say that you arrived here while wandering over the deep?"
Then, responding to her, resourceful Odysseus declared:
"It's hard, my queen, to render an exhaustive account
of my troubles: the heavenly gods have given me so many! But this I will tell you, in response to your enquiry:
There's an island, Ogygia, that lies far off in the deep,
and the daughter of Atlas, crafty Kalypso, lives there,
a dread fair-tressed goddess; with her there's no one else has intercourse, be it of gods or of mortal humans,
but unfortunate that I am, some god brought me alone
to her hearth, after Zeus struck my swift ship with a bright
bolt, and destroyed it in the midst of the wine-dark deep.
There all the rest of my staunch companions perished, but I clutched in my arms the keel of my curved vessel
and was borne off for nine days: on the tenth dark night the gods landed me on Ogygia, where Kalypso dwells-
that dread fair-tressed goddess! She welcomed me, took me in,
gave me food, treated me kindly, said she would make me immortal and ageless all my days; but she never
could persuade the heart in my breast. There I remained
for seven unbroken years,keeping ever damp with my tears
the immortal garments in which Kalypso clothed me.
But when in its cycle the eighth year arrived for me, then she urged and told me to be on my way once more- either she'd had a message from Zeus or else her own mind
had changed-and sent me off on a well-bound raft, and gave me
plenty of bread and sweet wine, with immortal clothes to wear,
and raised a good tailwind for me, both mild and breezy. For seventeen days then I sailed on over the deep,
and on the eighteenth your country's shadowy mountains came into sight, and the heart within me rejoiced.
But I was out of luck: I still had plenty of trouble
to live with, directed against me by Poseidon the Earth-Shaker, for he raised up winds to confront me, delayed my journey
by horribly roiling the sea, with waves that would not let me sail on, even miserably, aboard my raft: the storm
broke it up! Nevertheless, I still somehow managed
to swim my way through this great gulf of the sea, until wind and wave carried me to your coast. Had I attempted
to land there, the waves would have hurled me upon the strand, dashed me against great rocks at this cheerless site;
But I kept well clear, and swam on, until I reached the river,
and this seemed to me the best possible landing place,
being smooth of rocks and offering shelter against the wind.
Out then I stumbled, half dead, and ambrosial night came on. I got clear of the heaven-fed river, lay down
to sleep in the bushes, heaped up piles of leaves
around me: some god shed over me limitless sleep.
So there in the leaves, much troubled at heart, I slumbered the whole night through, and next morning until midday
and later-the sun was declining when at last sweet sleep
released me. Then I saw your daughter's maids at play on the shore, and herself among them, like a goddess.
To her I appealed: she knew what was proper behavior- a virtue you'd not expect to find a young casually met person displaying: the young are always so thoughtless!
She offered me food in abundance and sparkling wine and had me washed in the river and gave me these clothes.
Distressed I may be, but everything I've told you is the truth."
Then Alkinoös made him this answer, saying: "Stranger,
my child did not behave correctly in one respect: she should
have brought you here to our home, along with her handmaids,
since she was the first to whom you made your supplication."
Then in answer to him resourceful Odysseus declared: "Hero, do not for this rebuke your blameless daughter! She did indeed tell me to follow her with her handmaids,
But I would not, being scared and embarrassed, in case
you might be somehow offended by the sight; we're all very suspicious-minded, we breeds of men here on earth."
Alkinoös again responded to him, saying: "Stranger, the heart in my breast is not the kind to become irate
without good cause: due measure is always better.
No, I could wish-Zeus, Father, Athene, Apollo!-that you, being the kind of man you are, with a mind like my own, might have my daughter, be known as my son-in-law,
and be domiciled here: a house and property I'd give you
were you willing to stay! But against your will shall no
Phaiakian detain you-never be that Zeus the Father's wish!
For your convoy I set a day, that you may know it surely: tomorrow. Then you'll lie down, overmastered by sleep, and they'll row you over a calm sea until you arrive
at your country and home-or whatever place you fancy,
even if it's somewhere far more distant than Euboia,
the most remote of lands-or so say those of our people
who saw it when they conveyed the fair-haired Rhadamanthys to go visit Tityos, son of Gaia.Thither they voyaged,
without effort completed their journey, and came back
home that same day! So shall you too discover
by how much my vessels are the best, and my young men at sweeping the salt sea with their oar blades."
So he spoke.
Much-enduring godlike Odysseus, rejoicing, uttered
a personal prayer, in these words: "Zeus, Father, grant
that he, Alkinoös, may accomplish all he's promised!
So shall his fame spread, unquenchable, over all
the grain-giving earth, and I get home to my own country!" Such the words they exchanged in discussion with one another.
White-armed Arete now instructed her handmaids
to set up a bedstead down in the colonnade, and on it to spread fine purple blankets, with coverlets over them,
and on top of these fleecy mantles to wear as wraps. The maids went out of the hall with torches held in their hands,
and after they'd finished draping the close-strung bedstead,
they came back to Odysseus, and addressed him, saying: "Stranger, up with you now, your bed is made and ready."
Thus they spoke, and welcome he found it to lie down and rest. There, then, he slept, much-enduring godlike Odysseus,
on the corded bedstead down in the echoing colonnade.
But Alkinoös took his repose in the high house's inmost room, and beside him his lady wife now shared their bed and marriage.


BOOK 8

When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, Alkinoös, princely in power, arose from his slumber, and Odysseus, the Zeus-born sacker of cities, rose too.
Alkinoös, princely in power, now led the way to
the Phaiakians' assembly place, built for them near their ships:
On arrival there they sat down on the polished stones side by side, while Pallas Athene went through the city in the likeness of the herald of sagacious Alkinoös,
working on the return of great-hearted Odysseus. To each
man she met she would say, as she stood beside him:
"Come now, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians, attend the assembly, and hear all about the stranger
who's recently come to the house of sagacious Alkinoös
from being lost on the deep-in form he's like the immortals!"
So saying she stirred up each man's heart and spirit,
and quickly the seats of assembly were all filled up by gathering men, many of whom now marveled
at the sight of Laërtes' sagacious son, for Athene had shed a wondrous grace over his head and shoulders, made him
appear both taller and sturdier, so that he might
be welcome to all the Phaiakians, and inspire
awe and respect, and accomplish the numerous feats
in which the Phaiakians were to make trial of Odysseus. When they were all in place and gathered together,
Alkinoös made a speech, addressed the assembly, saying:
"Listen, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians,
while I tell you what the heart in my breast dictates. This stranger- who he is I don't know-has wandered here to my house,
whether from men of the east or the west. He wants
conveyance, and is begging us for assurance on that.
So let us, as in the past, provide him swift conveyance:
for no other man who's appeared at my house has had to wait in misery overlong for the convoy that he needed!
So come, let's haul a black ship down to the bright sea
for its maiden voyage; let those fifty-two young men,
the best crew in the district, be chosen to serve aboard it; and then, when each man has fastened his oar to its rowlock, disembark, come up to my house, partake of a quick meal- on me, I'll make ample provision for everybody involved!
That's my order to the young men. As for you others,
you sceptered princes, come on up to my beautiful dwelling, so we can entertain the stranger as guest in our halls,
and let no man refuse me! Also fetch the divine minstrel,
Demodokos: for to him the god's granted an unmatched gift
of song, to please, however his spirit may bid him sing."
That said, he led the way, and the sceptered princes followed, while a herald went off to fetch the divine minstrel,
and the chosen youths, two and fifty of them, obeyed his orders, and made their way to the unharvested sea,
and when they reached the ship and the sea, they hauled
the black vessel down to deep water, and in its black hull proceeded to step the mast, to set the sails, and secure
the oars to the leather straps of the rowlocks, all in due order.
This done, they spread the white sail, then anchored the vessel
well out in deep water. This done, they took themselves off
to the great abode of sagacious Alkinoös. There they found all the courtyards and colonnades and chambers crowded with the many guests that had gathered, both young and old.
For them Alkinoös slaughtered a dozen sheep and eight
white-tusked boars and a couple of shambling oxen: these
they skinned and dressed, and made ready a delectable feast.
Now the herald returned, bringing the trusty minstrel,
whom the Muse loved dearly, but gave him both good and ill: she robbed him of eyesight, yet made him a sweet singer.
The herald Pontonoös set him a silver-studded chair
amid the feasters, leaned it against a tall pillar,
hung the clear-toned lyre from a peg up over his head, and instructed him how to find it with his hands: so far the herald. Beside him he placed a basket and fine table,
along with a cup of wine to drink from when so minded.
Now they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them; but when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink
the Muse stirred the minstrel to sing of the famous deeds of men from that lay the fame of which had reached the wide heavens-
the quarrel between Odysseus and Peleus' son, Achilles,
how once they contended at a sumptuous feast of the gods with vehement words, and the king of men, Agamemnon, was glad at heart that the best Achaians were in contention,
for thus Phoibos Apollo had told him, when giving a response
in sacred Pytho, after he'd crossed the threshold of stone
to enquire of the oracle: then it was that the start of trouble
came rolling on Trojans and Danaäns on account of great Zeus' plans.
This theme the famous minstrel chose. But Odysseus took his great purple mantle in his powerful hands
and pulled it down over his head, to hide his handsome face,
ashamed to be shedding tears before the Phaiakians. Every time the divine minstrel had a pause in his singing
Odysseus would wipe off the tears, lift the mantle from his head, take a two-handled cup and pour a libation to the gods;
but when he began again-the Phaiakian nobles would urge him
to sing more, for they took great pleasure in his lays-
then Odysseus would once more cover his head and sigh. His weeping escaped the notice of all the others; only Alkinoös was aware of it and took notice, since he sat
beside him, and could hear his heavy sighing. At once
he addressed himself to the Phaiakians, oar-lovers all:
"Listen, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians: by now we've slaked our desire for the shared banquet
and the lyre that's the accompaniment to ample feasting;
now let's go out and make trial in every kind of athletic
contest, so that this stranger may tell his friends,
when he gets back home, how far we outstrip other men in boxing and wrestling, in jumping and running."
That said,
he led the way, and they followed him. On its peg
the herald hung up the clear-toned lyre, and took
Demodokos by the hand, led him out of the hall and followed the same road just taken by the other Phaiakian nobles to watch the contests. They went
to the place of assembly: a large throng accompanied them,
countless in number; there stood up many fine young men.
Up got Akroneos, Okyalos and Elatreus,
Nauteus and Prymneus, Anchialos and Eretmeus, Ponteus and Proreus, Thoon and Anabesineos, with Amphialos, the son of Polyneos, Tekton's son;
up, too, Euryalos, peer of man-killing Ares,
Naubolos' son, the best in looks and stature-
bar only peerless Laodamas-of all the Phaiakians; and up got the three sons of matchless Alkinoös:
Laodamas, Halios, and godlike Klytoneos.
These then first made trial of themselves in the footrace:
the pace was hot from the start, they all raced together, speedily kicking up the dust from the plain; but of them peerless Klytoneos proved by far the swiftest runner,
and by the length of the furrow mules plow in fallow land
he got back first to the crowd, well ahead of all the rest.
Then they competed in the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalos outdid all the best competitors; at jumping Amphialos had no rivals in the field, while with the discus Elatreus was an easy winner,
and at boxing Laodamas, Alkinoös' splendid son.
But after they'd all enjoyed these athletic contests, Laodamas, Alkinoös' son, had this to say to them:
"Come, friends, let us ask the stranger if there's any contest
that he knows and has practiced. In build he's not a weakling-
look at his thighs and calves, both arms above them,
his sturdy neck: great strength there! He's not lacking in manly vigor, but just broken by many misfortunes: for to my mind there's nothing worse than the sea
to break down a man, even though he be the strongest."
Then Euryalos in turn responded to him, saying:
"Laodamas, what you propose is rightly spoken!
Go challenge him now yourself, tell him what you told us."
When Alkinoös' good son heard this, he went and stood in the midst, and addressed Odysseus as follows, saying:
"Come on, stranger, father: you too should try these contests
if haply you're skilled in any: and it's likely that you are so skilled, for a man's life can show no greater glory than what he achieves with his own hands and feet.
So come, make trial of yourself, scatter care from your heart!
Your journey won't long be delayed now, already your ship
is hauled down and launched, your companions all are ready."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Laodamas, why do you make me this mocking challenge? My mind is far fuller of sorrows than of contests:
Before now I have suffered much, endured much hardship;
now here in your assembly I sit, and seek my homecoming, making my plea to your king and to his people as a whole."
Euryalos then replied, taunting him to his face:
"No, indeed, stranger, you don't look to me like a man
familiar with contests, such as mankind has in plenty;
you're more the sort that goes to and fro with his many- oared vessel, a captain of sailors who also are traders, taking care of his freight, an overseer of cargo
and gain got by greed. You don't look to me like an athlete."
With an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus responded:
"Sir, that was not well said; you sound like some reckless badmouth! It's true that the gods don't hand out gracious
gifts to all men, of either looks, or wit, or eloquence: one man will make a less impressive appearance, and yet
the god crowns his speech with grace, people regard him
with admiring pleasure, his utterances are sure, respectful and honey-sweet: he stands out in a crowd,
and as he goes through the city, men look on him as a god.
Another may be as handsome as the immortals, but
no crown of grace will be set on his public speaking-
and so with you: your looks are outstanding, not even
a god could improve them, but in mind you're inadequate. You've provoked the heart in my breast by your mannerless mode of address: I'm no novice at sporting contests
as you assert-no, I reckon I ranked among the first
while I could safely trust in my vigor and my hands;
but now trouble and grief possess me: much I've endured, cutting my path through men's wars and the damaging waves. Yet despite my great suffering I'll make trial of your contests,
for your words gnaw at my heart, what you said drives me on."
So saying, he sprang up, still in his mantle, and seized
a stone quoit-one bigger, thicker, and weightier by far
than those the Phaiakians used to compete against each other. This he whirled about and let fly from his mighty hand,
and the stone whirred: down they crouched on the ground, did the long-oared Phaiakians, men famous for their ships,
beneath the stone's flight. Past the marks of all it flew,
fast sped from his hand, and Athene-in the likeness of a man- checked the length of the cast, and then addressed him, saying:
"Even a blind man, stranger, could distinguish this cast of yours by feeling for it: it's not mixed up with the rest but well
ahead of them all. This contest at least should encourage you- No Phaiakian will equal your cast, much less get past it."
So she spoke. Much-enduring godlike Odysseus rejoiced,
glad to have met with a friendly supporter at these contests.
Then, in a lighter mood, he spoke among the Phaiakians: "Match that cast now, young men! I'll soon let fly another, its equal in length, or maybe an even longer shot!
As for the rest of you, if anyone's heart and spirit
so bids him, come on, let him try me, since you've got me angry-
boxing, wrestling, or running, I don't care which, any Phaiakian, except for Laodamas in person,
he being my host: who'd fight the one that befriended him?
Witless the man and worthless that would ever challenge
to a contest the host who gave him a kindly welcome
in some foreign country: he'd cut all his own hopes short! But of the rest there's none I either refuse or slight:
I want to learn their strength, to test myself against them.
For I'm no slouch all round in the contests that men practice-
well do I know how to handle a polished bow,
and always I'd be the first to shoot and hit my man
in the thick of the enemy, though many of my comrades were standing beside me, loosing off arrows at the foe.
Philoktetes alone it was who excelled me at archery
in the land of the Trojans, when we Achaians were shooting!
Of the rest I can claim to be the best by far
of all mortals that now eat bread upon this earth,
though I have no wish to compete with those of former times, with Herakles or Oichalian Eurytos, such men
as competed in marksmanship even with the immortals.
For that was why great Eurytos died young, why no old age
caught up with him in his halls: Apollo, furious, slew him
because he'd challenged the god to an archery contest. What's more, I can throw a spear further than any man can shoot an arrow!
In the footrace alone I fear I may be outrun by some
Phaiakian: I've been harshly battered by countless waves, and aboard my ship I had no long-term care for my body, which is why my limbs are now very badly out of trim."
So he spoke, and they all remained hushed in silence. Only
Alkinoös made him an answer, addressed him saying:
"Stranger, your words here among us were not ungracious, but due to your wish to make clear your innate prowess-
being angered, because that man confronted you in this contest and mocked you, in a way no mortal who was aware
of how to speak fittingly would disparage your prowess.
So come now, give heed to my words, that you may tell them to some other hero, when in your own great hall
you're feasting, together with your wife and children, and recall our feats, the achievements that to us too
Zeus has constantly granted since the days of our fathers.
Now we're not unmatched as boxers, or as wrestlers, but in the footrace we run swiftly; we're the best of seamen,
and dear to us always are feasting, and dancing, and the lyre, and changes of clothes, hot baths, and bed. So come,
all you Phaiakians who are our finest dancers,
foot it gaily, so that the stranger may report to his friends, after getting back home, how far we surpass all others
in seamanship, fleetness of foot, and dancing and singing!
And let someone go at once and fetch for Demodokos
the clear-toned lyre that's lying somewhere in our halls."
So spoke godlike Alkinoös, and the herald got up to go fetch the hollow lyre from the king's domain.
Then nine umpires arose, all chosen by popular vote, whose job was to regulate every detail of the games.
They leveled a dancing floor, cleared a fine open space,
and the herald approached, bringing the clear-toned lyre
for Demodokos, who then went to the middle, and round him stood young men in youth's first bloom, well skilled at dancing, and performed the steps of the sacred dance. Odysseus,
marveling, watched the flash of their feet as they moved.
Demodokos now struck his lyre to introduce the fine lay about Ares' love for sweet-garlanded Aphrodite-
how they first lay together in the house of Hephaistos, secretly, how he showered her with gifts, shamed the marital
bed of the lord Hephaistos, to whom Helios promptly came
with the news that he'd seen them making love. And when Hephaistos heard his heart-rending tattle, he went
off to his smithy, secretly planning revenge,
and set on its block the great anvil, and hammered out bonds
unbreakable and unloosable, made to hold fast when set;
then, having fashioned this snare in his fury against Ares, he went to the chamber where his own dear bedstead stood and circled the bonds round the bedposts from every angle: many he hung overhead, attached to the rafters, as fine
as spiders' webs, so that none could see them, not even
one of the blessed gods, so craftily were they fashioned.
Then, when he'd placed his snares all around the bed, he made as though he was going to Lemnos, that well-built citadel,
of all lands on earth to him by far the dearest. And no
blind watch did golden-reined Ares keep, but when
he saw the famed craftsman Hephaistos departing, he went straight off to the house of the same famous Hephaistos, his mind imagining sex with sweet-garlanded Kythereia.
Now she from a spell with her father, the mighty son of Kronos,
had just arrived, and sat down: Ares entered the house and took her by the hand, and addressed her, saying:
"Come, my love, let's to bed and its pleasures: for no longer is Hephaistos around here, but I think is on his way
to Lemnos, off there visiting the rough-spoken Sintians."
Such his words, and she welcomed the prospect of bedding him. They went to bed and lay down. But the crafty bonds devised
by artful Hephaistos immobilized them: they were unable
to move their limbs, let alone get up. Then they knew the truth, that for them no longer was there any chance of escape.
So the far-famed double cripple came home and found them,
having turned back before he reached the land of Lemnos, since Helios kept watch for him, brought him the news. He went to his house now, deeply troubled at heart,
and stood there in the forecourt, gripped by a wild fury,
and with a terrible shout cried out to all the gods:
"Zeus! Father! All you other blessed immortal gods! Come see a sight both ridiculous and unseemly- the way because I'm lame Zeus' daughter Aphrodite dishonors me constantly by loving destructive Ares
because he's strong-limbed and handsome, whereas I
was born misshapen, for which there's no one to blame
but my two parents-would they'd never had me! Now you shall see for yourselves the way they go to make love
in my own bed, to me a grievous sight-yet somehow
I don't imagine they'll want to lie thus a minute longer
however much they're in love: they'll soon lose the urge for sleep-rather those crafty bonds will hold them tight until her father pays back to me every single bride-gift
I lavished on him in return for his bitch of a daughter,
since the daughter's beautiful, but lacking in self-restraint."
So he spoke, and the gods came crowding to his bronze-floored house: Poseidon, the Earth-Embracer, along with Hermes,
the helper, and Lord Apollo, the deadly archer; but
the female deities stayed, every one, at home for shame.
So there they stood in the doorway: gods, givers of good things,
and laughter unquenchable rose among the blessed gods as they gazed at the crafty work of ingenious Hephaistos,
and thus would one of them say, with a glance at his neighbor: "Ill deeds don't thrive! The slow catches the swift,
just as now Hephaistos the laggard has caught Ares,
though of the gods holding Olympos he's the swiftest; though lame, he caught him by guile. Now Ares must pay the adulterer's fine." So they spoke to one another.
But to Hermes the lord Apollo, the son of Zeus, now said:
"Hermes, Zeus' son, guide, giver of good things, would you
be ready, even if hard-pressed by such powerful bonds, to sleep in a bed at the side of golden Aphrodite?"
Then the guide, the slayer of Argos, answered him: "How I wish, Lord Apollo, deadly archer, that this might come to pass-
with three times as many unshakable bonds set round me,
and you gods, with all the goddesses too, looking on- that I might sleep at the side of golden Aphrodite!"
At his words laughter arose among the immortal gods. Poseidon, though, was not laughing, but kept entreating
Hephaistos, the far-famed craftsman, to set Ares free:
he spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Free him, and I promise on his behalf, as you require, that he will
pay the full proper sum before the immortal gods."
Then the far-famed double cripple answered him thus:
"Do not demand this of me, Poseidon, Earth-Embracer:
a pledge made on behalf of the worthless is a worthless pledge! And how could I constrain you among the immortal gods were Ares to dodge both debt and bond and just vanish?"
Then Poseidon the Earth-Shaker responded to him, saying:
"Hephaistos, even were Ares to renege on the debt he owes
and take off in flight, I myself will pay the total sum."
The far-famed double cripple responded to this, saying: "I cannot refuse your offer: that would not be seemly."
So saying, the mighty Hephaistos unlocked the snares,
and the two, once freed from the snares, despite their strength,
sprang up at once: he, Ares, now took himself off to Thrace, while she, smiling Aphrodite, left for Paphos on Cyprus, where she had her sacred precinct and fragrant altar.
There the Graces bathed her, anointed her with ambrosial
oil, such as soothes the skin of the gods who are forever,
and clothed her in elegant raiment, a wonder to behold.
This was the lay the famed minstrel sang; and Odysseus listened with great enjoyment, as did the others,
the long-oared Phaiakians, men famous for their ships.
Then Alkinoös had Halios and Laodamas dance-
alone, since no one else could match their performance. They took in their hands an exquisite purple ball,
that the skilled artist Polybos had fashioned for them, and one would toss it high to the shadowy clouds,
leaning back, while the other would leap high off the ground
and easily catch it before his feet touched earth again.
But when they'd tested their skill at throwing the ball straight up, then they danced upon the grain-giving earth, quickly tossing the ball to and fro, while the other youths
stood beating time, and a din of stamping feet arose.
Then godlike Odysseus addressed Alkinoös, saying:
"Alkinoös, lord, most distinguished among all peoples, you claimed that these your dancers were unrivaled,
and they've proved it true: I'm awed by the sight of them."
So he spoke, and Alkinoös, princely in power, rejoiced,
and at once addressed the oar-loving Phaiakians, saying: "Listen, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians:
this stranger seems to me a man of the highest discretion! Come then, let's give him a guest-gift, as is befitting:
twelve renowned princes hold sway in this our country as rulers, and I myself am the thirteenth: let each
one of the twelve now bring him a fresh-washed mantle and tunic, as well as a talent of precious gold,
and let's collect all this now, so that the stranger
may go happy to supper, holding our gifts in his hands- and let Euryalos make amends to him in person,
with words and a gift: what he said was most unfitting."
So he spoke: they all approved, and endorsed the offer, and each sent off a herald to fetch the gifts,
and Euryalos in his turn now responded, saying:
"Alkinoös, lord, most distinguished among all peoples,
I shall indeed makes amends to the stranger, as you bid me.
I'll give him this all-bronze sword, which possesses a hilt of silver, and a scabbard of fresh-sawn ivory
encases it. It will be of great value to him."
That said,
to Odysseus he handed over the silver-studded sword,
and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Greetings, father, stranger: if any word that's been uttered was improper,
may storm winds now snatch it up and carry it off ! And may
the gods grant you see your wife, reach your own country:
Too long you've endured hardship far from your dear ones."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to him, saying: "Greetings to you too, friend! May the gods enrich you, and may you never hereafter be seized by longing for
this sword you've given me-with a handsome apology."
That said, he hung from his shoulders the silver-studded sword, and the sun went down, and the glorious gifts appeared.
Noble heralds now bore them to Alkinoös' abode, where the sons of peerless Alkinoös took charge of these
exquisite presents, and set them before their revered
mother. Alkinoös, princely in power, led them,
and in they came and sat down on the high-backed chairs. Then mighty Alkinoös addressed himself to Arete:
"My wife, bring a fine chest here, the best we have,
and in it put a fresh-laundered mantle and a tunic,
and set a bronze cauldron to warm on the fire, heat water in it, so that when the stranger has bathed and had a good look
at all the gifts the peerless Phaiakians brought here,
he may then enjoy the feast, and the minstrel's singing;
and I shall make him a present of this fine golden
cup of mine, that he may remember me all his days
when he pours in his hall libations to Zeus and the other gods."
So he spoke; and Arete gave orders to her handmaids
to set over the fire a great cauldron as quickly as they could.
They settled the bathwater cauldron on the blazing flames
and filled it with water and under it kindled firewood. Flames lapped the cauldron's belly, the water grew hot, while Arete fetched for the stranger an exquisite chest from her storeroom, and in it placed the beautiful gifts-
the clothes, the gold-that the Phaiakians provided,
together with a mantle and fine tunic that she put in
herself, then addressed Odysseus with winged words, saying: "Take care of the lid yourself, put a quick knot on it,
lest someone rob you during your homeward journey,
while you're traveling, sweetly asleep, aboard that black ship."
When much-enduring godlike Odysseus heard those words he at once fitted the lid on, and quickly secured it with
a complex knot he'd once learned from the lady Kirke.
Then promptly the housekeeper called him to go and be scrubbed
in the bathtub, and he rejoiced in his heart on seeing
the warm bath, since such care had been far from frequent ever since he'd left the home of fair-tressed Kalypso, though till then he'd been cared for continually like a god.
So when the handmaids had bathed him, rubbed him with oil,
they dressed him in a splendid mantle and tunic, and he
stepped away from the bathtub and went to join the men
at their wine. And Nausikaä, whose beauty was from the gods, stood by the pillar supporting the close-packed roof,
and marveled at Odysseus as she took in his appearance,
and spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying:
"Farewell, stranger: even when you're back in your own country remember me: I was the first to whom you owed your life."
In answer to her resourceful Odysseus then said:
"Nausikaä, daughter of great-hearted Alkinoös,
so now may Zeus, Here's loud-thundering husband,
let me return to see the day of my homecoming!
There too I'll pray to you as I would to a god
all the days of my life: for you saved my life, my dear." With that he sat down on the chair beside King Alkinoös.
By now they were serving out portions and mixing the wine,
and the herald came in leading the trusty minstrel Demodokos, much honored by the people, set his chair in the midst of the diners, backed against a high pillar.
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed himself to the herald
as he cut off a piece of the chine-more still was left-
from a white-tusked boar, with rich fat on either side: "Here, herald, take this cut and give it to eat
to Demodokos: I salute him, despite my grief:
for among all men worldwide minstrels receive their share
of honor and reverence, since the Muse has taught them
the ways of song, and has love for the whole tribe of singers."
So he spoke: the herald took it and placed it in the hands of the hero Demodokos. He accepted it with pleasure.
Now they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them;
but when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
then resourceful Odysseus addressed Demodokos, saying: "Demodokos, higher than all mortal men I praise you, whether it was the Muse, Zeus' daughter, or Apollo
that taught you, for you sing truly of the Achaians' fate-
all that they did and suffered, every hardship they endured, as though you'd been there yourself, or were told by one
who had!
But change your theme now, and tell us about the Horse, the Wooden Horse that Epeios made with Athene's help, and Odysseus led up to the citadel, a deceptive trap,
after filling it with the men who sacked Ilion. If indeed you perform this lay in right fashion, then I'll declare,
to all mankind, that the god, with a propitious heart, has bestowed upon you the gift of divine song."
So he spoke.
Setting out from the god, the other began to narrate the tale,
from when the Argives embarked on their well-benched ships
and sailed away, after setting fire to the huts,
while those led by far-famed Odysseus were already sitting in the Trojan place of assembly, concealed in the Horse.
The Trojans themselves had hauled it into the citadel, and
with it standing there they made many indecisive speeches
sitting around it. Three proposals found supporters:
to cut through its hollow timbers with the pitiless bronze, to drag it up to the summit and push it over the edge,
or leave it as a great offering to propitiate the gods-
which in the event, was what was destined to happen,
for it was their fate to perish when the city enfolded that great horse of wood, in which sat all the best
of the Argives, bringing the Trojans massacre and death. How the Achaians' sons then sacked the city he sang,
as they poured from the horse, leaving their hollow ambush;
how they variously laid the steep city waste as they fought through it: how Odysseus, like Ares, together with godlike Menelaös pressed on to the house of Deïphobos. There
it was, he said, that he dared his most terrible battle,
and won in the end through the aid of great-hearted Athene.
This was the lay the far-famed minstrel sang. But Odysseus melted: tears from under his eyelids wet his cheeks.
And as a woman wails and clings to her dear husband who's fallen fighting to save his city and his people,
warding off from township and children the pitiless day,
and she sees him dying and gasping for breath, collapses on him, shrieking aloud, while enemies behind her batter her back and shoulders with their spears,
and drag her away into slavery, to a life of toil and grief,
while with most pitiful sorrow her cheeks are wasted-
such pitiful tears Odysseus now shed beneath his brows. His weeping escaped the notice of all the others; only Alkinoös was aware of it and took notice, since he sat beside him, and could hear his heavy sighing. At once
he addressed himself to the Phaiakians, oar-lovers all:
"Listen, you leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians, and let Demodokos silence his clear-toned lyre,
for the lay he's singing does not please every listener. Since we began our feast, and the divine singer arose,
he's never-I mean the stranger-ceased from heartfelt
lamentation: some great grief must have assailed his mind! Then let the minstrel stop, so we all can enjoy ourselves, both hosts and guest: this is much the better way, since
it's for our respected guest all this has been laid on:
his conveyance, the kindly gifts we've given him as friends.
Dear as a brother the stranger and suppliant is regarded by any man whose wits have the slightest grasp of wisdom.
Do not, therefore, stranger, hide behind deceptive phrasing the true answers to what I shall ask you: best to speak plainly.
Tell me the name by which your mother and father
called you back there, and the others in your town and district, for there's none of mankind is wholly without a name,
neither common nor noble, from the time he was born, but at their birth their parents fasten names on them all.
And tell me your country, your district and your city,
that our ships may convey you thither, steering by their wits- for among the Phaiakians there exist no steersmen,
nor indeed steering oars, such as other vessels possess;
the ships themselves understand men's purposes and minds,
and know all the cities of men, their fertile plowland,
and the gulf of the salt deep they traverse most speedily, hidden in mist and cloud; nor do they ever have
the slightest fear of encountering damage or shipwreck. Yet once I heard a story related by my father,
Nausithoös: he used to say that Poseidon was angry
with us, because we give safe convoy to all and sundry. One day, he said, a most beautiful Phaiakian vessel returning from escort duty out on the misty deep,
he'd smite, and hide our city with a great mountain round it.
So said the old man; the god will either fulfill this
or leave it unfulfilled, as the fancy takes him. But come, tell me this, and give me a true account of it: where have your wanderings taken you, to what countries
of men have you come, their people, their populous cities,
whether rough and wild and uncivilized, or those
that welcome strangers, and have god-fearing minds ! And tell me what makes you weep and lament at heart as you hear the fate of the Danaän Argives, of Ilion:
this the gods fashioned, and spun the thread of destruction
for mankind, that there might be a song for those yet to come.
Did some kinsman of yours, perhaps, lose his life before Ilion?
Some fine warrior, wife's father or son-in-law, those
who are closest to you after your own flesh and blood? Or was it a comrade maybe, one especially dear to you,
this fine warrior? For in no way less than a brother
is he who's a comrade and whose mind embraces wisdom."


BOOK 9

Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Alkinoös, lord, most distinguished among all peoples, it is indeed a good thing to listen to such a minstrel
as this man is, who resembles the gods in his singing!
There is, I'd say, no greater fulfillment of pleasure
than when all the people share a common enjoyment, and those feasting in the halls are listening to a minstrel as they sit there in order, and all the tables are loaded with bread and meat, and the cupbearer draws off wine
from the bowl, and pours it into the cups. Indeed,
to me this seems the very best kind of occasion.
But your spirit has moved you to ask about my unhappy troubles, that I may weep and sigh still further.
What then shall I tell you first, what later? The heavenly
gods have laid on me sorrows past counting. First,
now, I'll tell you my name, that you all may know it, and afterwards, if I escape the pitiless day, I may
in turn be your host, far off though I make my home.
I am Odysseus, Laërtes' son, well known to all mankind
for my crafty devices: my fame goes up to heaven.
My home is in sunny Itháke: there's a mountain on it, a landmark, Neriton, leaf-clad; and around it are many islands, set close each one to its next neighbor- Doulichion, Same, and forested Zákynthos.
Itháke itself lies low in the sea, furthest out toward
night, but the rest are apart, nearer dawn and sunrise.
It's rough land, but fine for raising young men. Myself, I can't think of a sweeter sight than one's own country.
Kalypso, bright among goddesses, kept me with her, it's true,
in her hollow caves, wanting me for her husband;
and Kirke likewise detained me in her halls,
that wily Aiaian lady, wanting me for her husband;
but neither could ever persuade the heart in my breast- so sure as nothing's sweeter than a man's own country
and forebears, though he may live far away in a rich home
in some foreign land, and quite remote from his parents.
"But come, let me tell you now of the grief-laden homecoming that Zeus afflicted me with on my way back home from Troy. From Ilion the wind drove me, brought me to the Kikones,
to Ismaros. There I sacked the city, slaughtered the men.
From the city we took both the wives and a heap of goods and divided them. I made sure none got less than a fair share. Then I was all for us light-footing it out of there,
and so urged; but the rest, the great fools, refused to listen.
Then much wine was drunk, and many a sheep they slew
along the shore, many crumple-horned shambling steers.
The Kikones meanwhile had gone and appealed to other Kikones, their neighbors-more numerous, and more courageous too, who dwelt on the mainland, and knew all about fighting
from chariots as well as, where necessary, on foot.
They came now, as thick as leaves and flowers in season, at dawn: then indeed an ill fate from Zeus beset us,
out of luck as we were, brought us a mass of troubles.
By the swift ships they stood and fought: each side
attacked the other with their bronze-tipped spears.
While it was morning still, while the sacred day increased, we stood firm and held them off, despite their numbers; but once the sun had reached the hour for unyoking oxen,
then the Kikones broke the Achaians and overwhelmed them,
and six of our well-greaved comrades from each ship
died, but the rest of us dodged death and destiny. So we sailed on from there, lamenting at heart, but glad
at having got clear of death, though we'd lost our comrades.
Nor did I let our curved ships proceed any further
until we'd all called out three times to each of our luckless
comrades who'd died on the plain, cut down by the Kikones.
Yet against our ships cloud-gathering Zeus still roused the north wind, with an awesome tempest, and hid
both land and deep sea behind clouds: night sprang from heaven.
Our ships were driven on sidelong, fragments-three, four-
were ripped from the sails by the violence of the wind. So, scared of destruction, we lowered them to the deck, and rowed our way hastily landward. There for two nights and two days continuously we lay to,
eating our hearts out with sorrow and sheer exhaustion;
but when fair-haired Dawn brought on the third day, then we stepped the masts, hoisted the white sails, and took our seats: the wind and the helmsmen steered our vessels.
And then unscathed I would have come back to my own country;
but as I was rounding Cape Malea the waves and the current
and the north wind drove me off course, sent me past Kythera.
For the next nine days I was borne on by deadly winds over the fish-rich sea; on the tenth I set foot
on the land of the Lotus-Eaters, who feed off a flowery food.
Here we went ashore and replenished our store of water,
and my comrades now had a meal, there by the swift ships. But when we'd gotten our fill of food and drink,
then I sent out some comrades to go ahead and discover
what kind of people, among earth's bread-eaters, dwelt here-
two men I chose, and a third to go with them as herald.
They went straight off, and soon found the Lotus-Eaters;
and these Lotus-Eaters, far from wanting to kill our comrades, offered them lotus to eat. Now none
who consumed the honey-sweet fruit of the lotus any longer
had the urge to bring news back or continue the voyage,
but were set upon staying right there, with the Lotus-Eaters,
munching lotus, their homecoming all forgotten. These men I myself dragged weeping back to the ships, and tied them up below deck in the hollow vessels,
and ordered all the rest of my trusty companions
to board the swift ships without delay, lest any
by eating the lotus should forget their homecoming.
So they quickly embarked, and, seating themselves at the rowlocks, ranged in good order, struck the grey brine with their oars.
"From there we sailed on further, grieving at heart, until
we reached the Kyklopes' country-an arrogant, lawless people who, relying upon the immortal gods,
with their own hands plant nothing, nor do they plow; but everything flourishes for them, unplowed, unsown:
wheat and barley, and vines that bear rich clusters
of grapes; and the rain of Zeus makes them grow. They have neither assemblies for counsel nor established customs,
but make their homes near the summits of high mountains in hollow caves, and each man lays down the law
to his children and wives: they care nothing for one another.
"A fertile island's spread out there, beyond the harbor, neither near the Kyklopes' land, nor yet remote from it, well wooded: on it countless wild goats flourish,
for no human comings and goings get in their way,
nor do hunters disturb them, men who have it rough
tracking game in the woodland over the mountain tops; nor is it grazed on by flocks or put under the plow,
but unsown and unplowed all its days it stays bereft of humankind, supports nothing but bleating goats.
For the Kyklopes have no vermilion-cheeked vessels,
nor in their land are there shipwrights, who might build them well-benched ships that could answer all their needs,
take them to other men's countries (as often enough
men traverse the sea in ships to call upon one another)-
men who could also develop the island for them,
for it's far from poor and could grow every crop in season: on it are meadows, beyond the banks of the salt-grey sea, soft and well watered: vines would never lack moisture,
the earth's good for plowing, they could reap deep-standing
harvests in season, so rich is the subsoil. Here too
is a good safe harbor, with no need of moorings, either anchor stones to throw out or stern warps to secure:
one can just beach one's vessel and wait till the crew are minded to put to sea, and get a soft following wind.
At the head of the harbor there's bright water flowing,
a spring from under a cave, with poplars growing round it. There we sailed in, and some god gave us guidance through the murky night, for there was no light to see by:
a deep mist lay round the ships, nor did the moon
shed any light from heaven, but was obscured by clouds.
None got a glimpse of that island, nor could we see the long breakers rolling in on the shore, until
we beached all our well-benched vessels, and, that done, lowered the sails on each one of them, and ourselves
then disembarked on the seashore, and lay down
to sleep, and awaited the coming of dawn and brightness.
"When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, we went exploring the island, in amazement at it, and the nymphs, the daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus,
sent out the mountain goats, to give my comrades dinner.
At once we took from the ships curved bows and long-socketed goat-spears, and forming ourselves into three groups
went hunting, and right off some god provided us
with a most satisfactory bag. Twelve ships came with me,
and each got nine goats by lot; for me alone they chose ten.
"So then for the rest of the day until the sun went down we sat eating abundant meat and drinking the sweet wine, for not yet was all the red wine in our ships consumed, but some remained; each crew had drawn off a great deal
in jars, when we sacked the Kikones' sacred citadel.
Now we were looking across at the nearby Kyklopes' country- saw smoke, heard their voices, the bleat of their sheep and goats. But when the sun had set and darkness came on,
then we lay down and slept along the line of the shore.
"When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
I called an assembly and declared before them all:
'The rest of you stay here now, my trusty comrades:
I with my own ship and my own crew will go over and find out about these men-who they may be,
whether they're violent creatures, savage, and lawless,
or hospitable people, men with god-fearing minds.'
"That said, I boarded my vessel, ordered my companions to embark themselves, and to cast off the stern warps.
They came aboard quickly, seated themselves at the rowlocks,
and sitting in order struck the grey salt deep with their oars.
But when we got to the place, quite near at hand, there at
the land's edge, close to the sea, we saw a cave,
high, overgrown with laurels, where abundant flocks of sheep and goats spent the night. Around it a high
wall had been built, with stones sunk deep in the ground,
and long timbers of pine and lofty-crested oak.
There a monstrous man had his dwelling, who all alone herded his flocks far off, consorted with no others,
but lived by himself, mind bred in lawlessness:
a monstrous wonder, resembling not so much any bread-eating mortal, but rather the wooded peak
of some lofty mountain, standing out apart from the rest.
"Then I ordered the rest of my trusty comrades to stay there, where they were, by the ship, and to stand guard over it;
but I, having chosen the twelve best among my comrades, went on, taking a goatskin full of the sweet dark wine
that Maro gave me-Maro, Euanthes' son and priest of Apollo, the guardian of Ismaros-because we had protected him, together with his wife and his child,
out of reverence: his dwelling was in a wooded grove
of Phoibos Apollo, and he gave me splendid gifts:
of fine-wrought gold he bestowed on me seven talents, with a mixing bowl all of silver, besides the wine,
with which he filled a dozen large jars in all,
sweet and unmixed, a heavenly drink: not one
of his house servants or handmaids had knowledge of it,
only himself, and his wife, and one woman, their housekeeper; and whenever they drank this honey-sweet red wine
he'd mix one cup of wine with twenty measures of water,
and from the bowl would rise an aroma of marvelous
sweetness-then indeed to abstain would be no pleasure! With this wine I filled and took with me a sizable goatskin, and a leather bag packed with food, for my sharp mind sensed
that the man we were going to encounter, clad in huge strength,
was wild, with no knowledge of justice or civil rights.
"So we quickly came to the cave, but did not find him inside: he was out, tending his fat flocks at pasture. Then we entered the cave, amazed by all we saw there: baskets loaded with cheeses, pens full of lambs
and kids. Each age-group was sorted out separately-
the older ones by themselves, the middlers likewise,
the newborn too. All the pans were brimming with whey,
the buckets and bowls, well wrought, that he used for milking.
Right off, my comrades spoke up, implored me to take
some of the cheeses and leave, then quickly to drive
kids and lambs from the pens back to our swift ship, and sail away over the deep salt sea. But I would not listen-far better indeed had I done so!-for I wanted to meet this man, find out if he'd treat me as a guest.
No joy was he to my comrades when he did appear!
"So we lit a fire, and made sacrifice, and ourselves
took some of the cheeses and ate them, sat there inside waiting, till he returned with his flock, hefting a great load of dry firewood to serve him at suppertime,
and dumped it down with a crash as he came inside.
We shrank back, terrified, into the back of the cave, while he drove his fat flocks into the roomy cavern- all, that is, that he milked; the males he left outside, he-goats and rams, there in the deep yard. Then
he lifted and put in place a huge and massive
door stone: not twenty-two four-wheeled wagons,
strong ones, would have sufficed to raise it off the threshold, such a towering mass of rock he set in the doorway!
Then down he sat and milked the ewes and bleating she-goats,
all in turn, and set each lamb and kid to its mother.
Next, once he'd curdled half the white milk, he collected the curds in wicker baskets and put them aside.
The remaining half he left in the pails, so it would be handy to take and drink, and be ready for him at supper.
But after he'd busied himself with these tasks, he rekindled
the fire, and caught sight of us, and questioned us, saying: 'So, strangers, who are you? From where was it you sailed here
over the watery ways? On business? Or do you rove at random, cruising the sea like pirates, who, at risk of their own lives,
go around making trouble for men from other lands?'
"So he spoke, and we succumbed to panic in our hearts, terrified by his deep voice and his monstrous person; yet even so I responded, and addressed him, saying:
'We are, if you please, Achaians, driven wandering from Troy
by all the winds, across the great gulf of the sea,
seeking our homes, but blown on a different route,
the wrong paths: Zeus, I guess, must have planned it thus. We are, we claim, men serving Atreus' son Agamemnon- whose fame now is unsurpassed under heaven, so great
a city he sacked, so many people he slew! But we
who come to you now are suppliants, clasp your knees, hoping you'll treat us as guests, or in some other way give us some kind of present, as is proper with strangers. Kind sir, revere the gods! We are here as your suppliants,
and Zeus is the protector of suppliants and strangers,
the strangers' god, who looks after respectful guests.'
"So I spoke. And he with pitiless heart responded:
'You're a fool, stranger, or you must come from far away, telling me either to fear or to steer clear of the gods!
The Kyklopes pay no attention to Zeus of the aegis,
nor to the blessed gods-we're far mightier than they! Nor would I, to avoid the wrath of Zeus, spare either you or your comrades, unless the spirit so moved me!
But where, coming here, did you leave your well-built ship?
Far off was it, or nearby? Tell me: I'd like to know.'
"So he spoke, testing me; but I knew too much to be tricked, and when I replied it was with guile of my own:
'My ship was broken up by Poseidon the Earth-Shaker, who cast it upon the rocks at the frontier of your country:
close to the headland he drove it: the wind brought it ashore.
But I, and these men here, eluded sheer destruction.'
"So I spoke. He, with ruthless heart, made me no answer, but sprang up, laid hands on my comrades, grappled two,
and down on the ground, as though they were mere puppies,
dashed them: their brains spilled earthwards, wetted the floor. Then limb from limb he tore them to prepare his supper,
and devoured them like a mountain-bred lion, leaving nothing- innards and flesh, bones with the marrow in them,
while we, lamenting, reached out our hands to Zeus
at the sight of such bestial deeds. Helplessness overmastered our hearts. When the Kyklops had glutted his vast belly
by gobbling human flesh, washed down with unmixed milk,
he settled to sleep in the cave, stretched out among his sheep. So I planned an attack on him in my great-hearted spirit:
I'd steal up close, draw the sharp sword from beside my thigh,
and drive it into his breast, where the midriff cups the liver,
finding the spot with my hand. But a second thought stopped me- we too would have perished there, faced sheer destruction,
for we could never have thrust back from the lofty
entrance with our bare hands the huge stone he'd set there,
and so, lamenting, we lay there, awaiting the bright Dawn.
"As soon as Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, he rekindled the fire, and began milking his fine flocks, all in turn, and set each lamb and kid to its mother.
Then after he'd briskly accomplished his various tasks
he again grabbed two men together, and readied his meal. When he'd eaten, he drove his fat flocks out of the cave, easily shifting the enormous door-stone, and afterwards setting it back in place, like the lid on a quiver.
Then, whistling loudly, the Kyklops steered his fat flocks
uphill, and I was left there, planning mischief deep in my heart- to get back at him, have Athene let me boast of what I'd done!
"Now this was the plan that seemed, to my mind, the likeliest: The Kyklops had left a great club beside a sheep pen,
of green olive wood, that he'd cut to carry with him
when it had dried out. Eyeing this, we compared it in size to the mast of a black ship of twenty oars,
a broad-beamed merchantman, one that crosses the great sea gulf-so huge did its length and breadth look to us.
I went and chopped off a piece about a fathom long:
handed this to my comrades, told them to scrape it down, and they made it smooth, while I stood there and sharpened its point, then took and hardened it in the blazing fire,
and stowed it out of sight, hiding it under the dung
that was strewn throughout the cave in heaped-up piles.
I ordered the others to cast lots to decide
which ones would dare, with me, to hoist up this stake and ram it into his eye, when sweet sleep overcame him. The lot picked out the same ones whom I'd have chosen,
four of them; with these, as the fifth, I picked myself.
"In the evening back he came, herding his fine-fleeced flocks, and straightway drove his fat flocks into the wide cave-
all of them, left none outside in the deep enclosure:
some idea of his own, perhaps-or a god's command?
He lifted and put in place the huge and massive door-stone,
then sat down and milked the ewes and bleating she-goats, all in turn, and set each lamb and kid to its mother.
Then after he'd briskly accomplished his various tasks
he again grabbed two men together, and readied his meal.
It was now that I spoke to the Kyklops, going and standing
beside him, in my hands an ivy-wood bowl of dark wine:
'Here, Kyklops, drink this wine, now you've fed on human flesh, and learn what fine wine it is that's stowed aboard our ship:
I was bringing it as a libation, hoping you'd feel pity
for me, and send me on homeward; but your mad fury
is not to be borne! Cruel wretch, how in future will any man in the world come near you? What you've done is an outrage.'
"So I spoke. He took the wine, drained it, was vastly pleased as he swilled the sweet stuff, demanded a second bowlful:
'Quick, give me some more-and also tell me your name,
now, at once! I want to give you a guest-gift you'll enjoy!
For the Kyklopes too the grain-giving earth bears vines
with rich clusters of grapes, and Zeus' rain makes them grow; but this-this is a match for ambrosia and nectar!'
"So he spoke; and I once more brought him the bright wine.
Three bowlfuls I fetched and gave him, three times in his folly he drained them. Then, when the wine had fuddled his wits, I addressed him with honey-sweet words, saying: 'Kyklops, do you ask me my famous name? Very well, I will tell you-
and then you give me that guest-gift, just as you promised!
Nobody is my name, Nobody's what I'm called by my mother and father and all my comrades.'
"So I spoke, and at once he with pitiless heart responded: 'Nobody I shall eat last of all, when I've had all his companions,
and the others first: so, that will be your guest-gift.'
"So saying, he swayed and fell on his back, lay sprawling
with his thick neck twisted sideways: overmastering sleep
possessed him, from his gullet there gushed out wine
and gobbets of human flesh, as he drunkenly vomited.
It was now that I thrust the stake deep into the embers
to let it get hot, and encouraged all my companions
with heartening words, lest any back off from fear.
Then, just as the olive-wood stake, though green, was about
to catch fire, and was glowing, intensely incandescent,
I leaned close, pulled it clear of the flames. My companions
crowded around me. Some god breathed great courage into us.
The others grasped the olive-wood stake, sharp-pointed,
and rammed it into his eye, while I leaned over it,
and twisted it round. As when a man with a drill
bores a ship timber, and those below keep it turning
with a strap held at either end, and the drill runs nonstop-
just so we grasped and in his eye kept turning
that fire-sharpened stake: round the red-hot orb blood ran.
Eyelids and eyebrows alike were singed by the fiery breath
from the burning eyeball: its roots now crackled in the heat.
As when a blacksmith plunges a great axe or an adze
in cold water to temper it, and it hisses loudly-
for this is how iron achieves its greatest strength-just so
did his eye now hiss around the olive-wood point. He gave
a terrible scream, that made the rock resound,
and we shrank back in terror. He tore the stake, all slobbered
with fresh-shed blood, from his eye, and with both arms
hurled it from him, maddened with pain, and screamed aloud
to the other Kyklopes, those who were his neighbors,
dwelling in caves near the windswept mountaintops,
and they heard him cry out, and gathered from all around,
and stood by the cave and asked him what was the matter:
'What great hurt, Polyphemos, is it makes you scream like that
through the ambrosial night, and rouse us all from sleep?
Surely no mortal is rustling your flocks against your will?
Surely you're not being murdered by guile or by force?'
"From within the cave mighty Polyphemos answered them thus: 'My friends, Nobody's killing me by guile, not by force.' To this,
addressing him with winged words, they now responded:
'If no one is harming you, then, and you're alone, there's no
way you can dodge a sickness sent by great Zeus: you must just offer up prayers to our father, Lord Poseidon.'
"So they spoke, and departed. I laughed in my heart at the way that name,
and my faultless planning, had so deceived them. Meanwhile
the Kyklops, groaning and suffering agonies of pain,
groped with his hands, took the stone from the cave's entrance, and sat there in the opening with both arms wide outstretched, hoping to catch anybody who tried to slip out with the sheep- did he really suppose I was going to be that stupid?
By now I'd figured out just what I would have to do
to find an escape from death both for my companions and for myself: I'd thought of every trick and device
that might save our lives: the threat was great and immediate. Now this, to my mind, looked the best of such plans:
There were the rams, well-nourished and thickly fleeced,
fine strapping specimens, the wool on them violet-dark. These I silently tied together with pliable withies-
on which the Kyklops, bred in lawlessness, would sleep- taking three at a time: the middle one carried a man,
while the ones on each flank gave my comrades protection:
thus each three sheep bore one person. As for myself, there was one special ram, the best in the whole flock:
him I grasped by the back, curled up under his shaggy belly, and lay with my hands twisted into his marvelous fleece,
holding on tight, with great patience, never relaxing.
And so, lamenting, we lay there, awaiting the bright dawn.
"When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
then the males of the flocks sallied out of the cave to pasture, while the ewes went bleating about their pens, unmilked,
with bursting udders. Their master, in agonizing pain,
kept feeling along the backs of all his sheep
as they stood before him. The booby never perceived that under his rich-fleeced sheep there were men tied on!
Last of the flock the ram approached the entrance, heavy
with his thick wool-and with me and my quick thinking!
Groping his back, the strong Polyphemos addressed him, saying:
'Dear ram, why do you come thus through the cave, the very last of the flock? You used not to lag behind the others,
but were always first out, to graze on the lushest pasture,
striding ahead, the first to reach the flowing river,
the first that liked to head back into the sheepfold when
evening came on. But now you're the last of all. Are you mourning, maybe, your master's lost eye, which a wicked man put out,
he and his wretched fellows, when he'd doused my wits with wine- Nobody-who, I tell you, is not clear of destruction yet !
If you only could think as I do and had the power of speech to tell me where that creature is hiding away from my might,
then would his brains, dashed out, lie scattered over the ground throughout the cave, and my spirit would be lightened
of all the ills which that nothing-worth Nobody's brought me.'
So saying, he let the ram go on out through the entrance.
"When we'd moved on a little way from the cave and the enclosure, first I loosed myself from the ram, then untied my comrades.
Quickly then we drove off the fat, smart-stepping sheep,
glancing back all the time, until we reached our ship.
A welcome sight to our dear comrades were those of us who'd escaped death: for the others they started wailing.
But this I stopped, with a silent upward jerk of the head
that said 'No' to their weeping. I told them to throw on board,
fast, all the fine-fleeced sheep, and to put to sea at once.
They came aboard quickly, each man to his rowlock, and seated in proper order they struck the grey brine with their oars,
and when we had backed offshore as far as a man's shout would carry, I called out to the Kyklops with mocking words:
'Kyklops, it was, then, no weakling whose comrades you planned,
by might and brute force, to eat in your hollow cave! In full were your evil deeds to rebound on your own head, vile wretch,
who did not shrink from eating the guests in your house, for which Zeus and the other gods have exacted requital from you.'
"So I spoke, and my words made him yet more angry at heart,
so that he wrenched off, and hurled at us, the peak of a lofty mountain, that fell just in front of our dark-prowed vessel, narrowly missing the end of the steering oar: the sea
surged up under the falling rock's impact, created
a wave that carried our vessel straight back shoreward,
a heaving swell from the deep, aimed directly at the land. But I seized a very long pole in my hands and thrust us clear once more, and urgently signed to my comrades
to row for dear life, and get us away from danger,
gesturing with my head. They bent to their oars, and rowed.
But when, working hard at the sea, we'd doubled the distance, then I shouted again to the Kyklops, though all around
my comrades with calming arguments tried stop me:
'Stubborn wretch, why so set on infuriating this savage? Just now he flung some missile seaward, drove our vessel
back to land-indeed, we thought we were done for!
If he'd heard any one of us making a sound, or shouting, he'd have broken our heads as well as the ship's timbers
with a cast of some sharp glinting boulder, so mighty his arm!'
"Thus they spoke, but could not shift my great-hearted spirit, and I answered him back, irate and resentful at heart: 'Kyklops, if any mortal, of all mankind, should ask you about your eye's unseemly blindness, tell them it was Odysseus, sacker of cities, who destroyed your eyesight: Laërtes' son, who calls Itháke his home.'
"So I spoke,
and he groaned aloud, and then responded to me, saying: 'Alas, that ancient prophecy has indeed come true for me! There once was a prophet here, a great gentleman too- Telemos, Eurymos' son, a man unmatched in seercraft,
who grew old as a diviner among the Kyklopes: he
told me that all these things would happen in time to come, that by Odysseus' hands I'd be deprived of my sight.
But I always thought it would be some tall and handsome hero who'd show up here, endowed with mighty strength:
But in fact it's this puny, no-account weakling who's
deprived me of eyesight after fuddling my wits with wine! Come back here, Odysseus, and let me offer you guest-gifts,
and urge the famed Earth-Shaker to grant you conveyance home, for I am his son, and he avows that he's my father.
He himself, if he so chooses, will heal me-he, and none other,
whether one of the blessed gods or some mortal human.'
"So he spoke, and I answered him, saying: 'How I wish
I had the power to strip you of breath and life, and send you down to the realm of Hades, as surely as no one
will heal your eye, not even the Earth-Shaker himself.'
"So I spoke, and he then prayed to the lord Poseidon, reaching out both his hands to the starry heavens: 'Hear me,
Poseidon, dark-haired Earth-Shaker, if I am truly your son, if you avow yourself my father! Grant
that Laërtes' son, whose home is on Itháke,
Odysseus, sacker of cities, shall not reach home- But if it's fated that he's to see his loved ones again,
to come back to his well-built house and his native land, may he get there late, in bad shape, all his comrades lost,
in a ship not his own, and be met with trouble in his home!'
"So he spoke in prayer, and was heard by the dark-haired god.
Then once more he hefted an even greater rock
and swung and hurled it, putting huge force into the throw, and it landed only a little behind our dark-prowed vessel,
narrowly missing the end of the steering oar: the sea
surged up under the falling rock's impact, created
a wave that carried our vessel straight on shoreward:
and so we came back to the island where all our other well-benched ships lay together, and around them sat
our comrades in tears, forever awaiting our return.
When we got there we ran up our vessel onto the beach, and ourselves disembarked upon the sandy strand.
The Kyklops' sheep we fetched out from the hollow ship and allotted them so that no one got less than his fair share.
But the ram my well-greaved comrades allotted to me alone
when the sheep were shared out, as a special prize: on the shore this ram to Zeus, Kronos' son, dark-clouded, omnipotent,
I sacrificed, burned the thighs. But he ignored my offering: he had in mind the destruction of all my well-benched ships,
and every last one of my trusty comrades. So then
the whole long day until the going down of the sun we sat feasting on meat in abundance and sweet wine; but when the sun had set and darkness came on
then we lay down and slept along the line of the shore.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
then indeed I aroused my companions and ordered them to embark themselves, and to cast off the stern warps.
They came aboard quickly, seated themselves at the rowlocks, and sitting in order struck the grey salt deep with their oars.
"So we sailed on from there, lamenting at heart, but relieved
at having got clear of death, though we'd lost our comrades."


BOOK 10

"To the isle of Aiolia then we came, where was the dwelling of Aiolos, Hippotas' son, much loved by the deathless gods, on a floating island: encircling it was a rampart
of unbreakable bronze: the rock ran up sheer and smooth.
Twelve offspring of his besides were established in his halls,
Six daughters there were, and also six lusty sons:
the daughters he gave to the sons to be their bedfellows. These always eat with their dear father and loving mother, and countless fine dishes are ready to hand before them.
The house smells of food, reechoes with their chatter
every day; but at nighttime, beside their modest wives, they sleep under blankets upon their corded bedsteads. It was, then, to their city and fine abode that we came,
and for a full month he befriended me, asked about everything-
Ilion, Argive vessels, the homecoming of the Achaians,
and I told him the whole story, just as it happened.
When I asked him about our own journey, wanted his help in sending us on our way, he denied me nothing, furnished conveyance, gave me a bag he'd made from the flayed hide
of a nine-year-old ox, in which he'd imprisoned the paths
of the blustering winds: Kronos' son had made him their steward, empowered to calm or arouse them, as he might choose.
This he put in my hollow ship, tied fast with a shining cord of silver, that let no breeze, however slight, escape.
For me, however, he sent a breath of the west wind to blow
that would bear ships and men home; but he wasn't destined to bring this about: our own folly was what undid us.
"For nine days on end we sailed, both by day and by night, and now on the tenth our homeland came into sight-
close enough indeed to see men tending their watch fires:
then it was that sweet sleep came upon me in my exhaustion, for I'd handled the sheet throughout, wouldn't let any other crew member have it, to get us back home the sooner.
But my comrades had started to mutter among themselves,
said I was bringing home gold and silver as presents
from Aiolos, Hippotas' great-hearted son; and thus
would one, with a sidelong glance, sound off to his neighbor: 'Look how this fellow is always loved and honored
by all men, whatever city or land he comes to!
Much rich treasure he's bringing back home from Troy
out of the booty, while we, who went through the selfsame venture as he did, are returning empty-handed!
And now he's been given these further generous gifts by Aiolos, out of friendship! So let's take a quick look and see how much gold and silver there is in that bag!'
"So they spoke,
and this evil advice of my companions was accepted. They opened the bag, and all the winds rushed out-
a storm wind instantly seized them, bore them seaward weeping, away from their native land; and I,
waking, debated in my own blameless spirit
whether to plunge overboard, and perish in the deep, or to endure in silence, remain among the living.
I held on and stayed, head covered, lying there
in my ship. By this evil gale our vessels were carried
right back to Aiolos' island, my comrades lamenting.
"There we went ashore and took aboard more water,
and my comrades at once ate a meal beside the swift ships. But when we'd gotten a taste of food and drink,
then I, taking with me a herald and one companion,
made my way to Aiolos' famed abode, and found him
at dinner, along with his wife and children. We entered his house, and sat by the doorposts, at the threshold. They were amazed to see us, and questioned us, saying:
'Why are you here, Odysseus? What mean god assailed you?
We dispatched you with all kindness, to ensure you'd come
safely to home and country, or wherever you wanted.'
"So they spoke; and, grieving at heart, I then explained to them: 'My wretched companions undid me; they, and damnable slumber! My friends, help me now: you have the power.'
"So I spoke, addressing them with conciliatory words;
but they remained silent. Then their father made this response:
'Leave this island at once, most abject of living creatures!
It's not proper for me to aid or provide conveyance
to a man whom the blessed gods abominate! Begone!
You come here as one marked out by divine hostility!'
"That said, he dismissed me, groaning heavily, from his domain. So from there we pushed on still further, grieving at heart,
the men's spirit worn down by the hardship of rowing, since, due to our folly, we no longer had a good wind behind us.
For six more days, then, we voyaged on, day and night,
and on the seventh we reached the steep citadel of Lamos,Laistrygonian Telepylos, where shepherd greets shepherd one driving his flock back home, out to pasture the other.
There a man that needed no sleep could earn a double wage,
by both herding cattle, and tending white sheep, so close
do the paths of the night and the day run on together. When we reached the fine harbor there-a sheer cliff face ran all the way round it from side to side, while two
projecting headlands, confronting each another, loomed large
at the mouth, leaving only a restricted entrance-
then all the rest went on in with their well-curved vessels.
and moored them there, snug inside the hollow harbor, packed side by side, for no wave ever stirred there, either great or small; all around was a bright calm.
But I alone held my black ship back outside
at the furthest edge, hitched my cables to a rock;
then climbed to a rugged lookout point, and stood there.
Looking round, I saw no cattle, no human activity, nothing except for a trace of smoke drifting skyward from the earth.
So I then sent out some comrades to go ahead and discover
what kind of men, among earth's bread-eaters, dwelt here: two men I chose, and a third to go with them as herald.
They went ashore and followed a beaten track, by which wagons would haul down wood to the city from the hilltops.
Outside the city they met a girl who was drawing water-
the strapping daughter, this, of a certain Laistrygonian, Antiphates: she'd come down to the fair-flowing spring, Artakie, from which they carried their water into town.
So they approached her, spoke to her, asked her questions-
Who was king of these people, and who were his subjects?
She promptly showed them her father's high-roofed house.
When they entered this famed domain, they found his wife at home, huge as a mountain peak, and were horrified by her.
She at once summoned famous Antiphates, her husband,
from assembly: he devised a miserable fate for them.
One of my comrades he grabbed, prepared him for dinner, But the other two took to their heels, got away to the ships. Then he raised a cry through the city, and when they heard it the powerful Laistrygonians thronged in from all around,
thousands of them, resembling not human beings, but Giants!
From the cliffs with boulders-each one a man-sized load- they showered us: a ghastly sound rose up from the ships
of men dying and tinber shattering. They speared them like fishes, carried them off to have as their gruesome meal.
But while they were murdering those inside the deep harbor,
I meanwhile, drawing the sharp sword from by my thigh with it cut the stern cables of my dark-prowed vessel,
and quickly called to my comrades, urging, commanding them to row for dear life, get us clear of disaster. They all,
in terror of death ripped up the salt spume with their oar blades.
Ah, the joy of escaping those sheer cliffs, getting out to sea- for my ship alone: all the rest now perished as they lay there.
"So we sailed on from there, lamenting at heart, but glad
at having escaped from death, though we'd lost our comrades;
and we came to the isle of Aiaia, that was the home
of fair-tressed Kirke, dread goddess of mortal speech-
full sister was she to the evil-minded Aietes,
and both were begotten by Helios, bringer of light,
on Perse, their mother, whom Ocean had as his daughter.
There we put in to land with our ship, and silently steered her
into a well-sheltered harbor, with some god guiding us. Then, after disembarking, we lay there two days and nights eating our hearts with out with fatigue and sorrow;
But when fair-tressed Dawn ushered in the third day, then
I took my spear and my keen-edged sword, and quickly
climbed on up from the ship to a point with a good view in my search for signs of field work or of human voices.
I got to a rocky outcrop, a lookout station, and stood there, and glimpsed smoke wavering up from the wide-wayed earth
out of Kirke's dwelling, through dense coppices and leafage.
So then I pondered, in my mind and spirit, whether- having seen fire and smoke-I should go and find out more; and as I reflected, it struck me that this was the best course: to go back to my swift ship first, and to the seashore,
give my comrades a meal, but then send them to investigate.
But as I went, and came close to my well-curved vessel, then, too, some god, seeing me alone, felt pity,
and sent, right into my path, a huge high-antlered stag on his way from his forest range to drink at the river,
since the sun's strong heat had got to him. As he emerged,
I speared him, in mid-back, piercing his spine: the bronze spear now transfixed him, he uttered a dying cry
and collapsed in the dust. The spirit fled from him. Then, one foot on his back, I tugged the bronze spear out
from the wound, left the carcass there on the ground,
while I plucked still-growing stems and osiers, wove them into a fathom-long rope, well twisted at either end,
and, tying the feet of this monstrous beast together,
slung it across my back, and went on to the black ship
leaning upon my spear, since no way could I support it
with one hand upon my shoulder, so huge a brute it was.
I dumped it in front of the ship, and spoke encouraging words to my comrades, addressing each individual in turn:
'Not yet, friends, for all our grief, shall we go down
to Hades' realm before our destined day arrives!
So come, while there's still food and drink in our swift ship Let's think about eating, not waste away from hunger!'
"So I spoke: they at once paid heed to my words, uncovered their faces,and, on that shore by the unharvested sea,
stared in awe at the stag: a huge beast it was indeed.
But when they'd feasted their eyes upon this spectacle
they washed their hands and made ready a truly splendid feast.
"So the whole long day until the going down of the sun
we sat feasting on meat in abundance, drinking sweet wine;
but when the sun had set and darkness came on
then we lay down and slept along the line of the shore. When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
I called an assembly and then addressed them all, declaring: 'Heed what I say, my comrades, for all your grim suffering!
Dear friends, we don't know where darkness lies, or dawn, or where the sun that brings light to mortals goes down
under the earth, or rises; but let us take thought, quickly: Is there any course open to us? Myself, I do not think so.
I climbed to a rugged lookout point and surveyed
the island. The boundless deep encircles it all around. It's low-lying land: I did see smoke, in the middle,
wavering up through dense coppices and leafage.'
"So I spoke, and their inner spirit was broken, as they recalled the deeds of Antiphates, the Laistrygonian,
and of the Kyklops, that gross-spirited man-eater.
They wept aloud and shed thick-flowing tears,
but all their lamenting accomplished nothing for them.
"I divided my well-greaved comrades into two groups, chose a leader for each of them: I myself took command
of one, put godlike Eurylochos in charge of the other.
Next, at once, we shook lots in a bronze helmet, and out leapt the lot of great-hearted Eurylochos.
So he set off, and took with him twenty-two comrades, all in tears; and the ones left behind were lamenting too.
"They found, in a woodland glen, the house of Kirke, built
of polished stone, and set in a space with a wide vista. Prowling around it were mountain wolves and lions that she had enchanted by feeding them evil drugs.
These beasts did not rush to attack my men, but instead
fawned round them, rearing, swishing their long tails.
In the way that dogs, when their master's coming from dinner, fawn round him, since he always has some tasty tit-bit for them, so round my men now fawned these strong-clawed wolves
and lions. The men were afraid on seeing such scary monsters.
So there they stood in the sweet-haired goddess' forecourt
and heard Kirke singing inside in an enchanting voice as she went to and fro, weaving a great immortal web-
fine work, exquisite, charming, as is that of all goddesses.
First to find words was Polites, leader of men, the dearest
to me of all my comrades, and the most devoted:
'Friends, there's some lady inside, going to and fro at the loom and singing so sweetly that the whole floor echoes round- goddess or woman, let's call out to her!'
"So he spoke, and they all clamored, calling out to her. She at once
threw open the shining doors, came out herself,
and invited them in. They all, in their innocence, followed, except for Eurylochos: he, suspecting a trap, hung back.
She escorted them in, sat them down on chairs and benches, and offered them barley meal, cheese, and pale yellow honey
mixed with Pramnian wine; but she added to this mixture
baneful drugs to destroy their memory of their homeland. When she'd given it them and they'd swallowed it, then at once she struck them with her wand, and shut them away in sties: they now all had pigs' heads, pigs' voices, and pigs' bristles,
pigs' bodies too; but their minds remained unchanged.
So they were penned in, weeping; and Kirke threw them oak nuts to eat, acorns, the fruit of the cornel tree- such food as swine that sleep on the ground will feed on.
"Now Eurylochos came straight back to our swift black ship
to tell us the news of his comrades and their unkind fate.
But not one word could he utter, much though he longed to, so stricken with great distress was he in his heart; his eyes
were brimming with tears, his spirit brooded on lamentation.
Only after we questioned him, in our amazement, did he
then inform us about the fate of his other comrades:
'We went through the wood as you told us, noble Odysseus, and found, in a glen, a splendid house, constructed
of polished stone, and set in a space with a wide vista.
Someone inside was going to and fro at a great web, singing
sweetly, goddess or woman. We all called out to her.
She at once threw open the shining doors, emerged, and invited us in. The rest, in their innocence, followed. But I held back, suspecting a trap, and they then vanished together-not one of them ever returned,
though I sat around long enough, watching out for them.'
"So he spoke. I now slung my silver-studded sword-
large, of bronze-from my shoulders, strapped on my bow and quiver, told him to lead me back the way he'd come.
But he clutched at my knees with both hands, besought me, wept,
then addressed me tearfully with winged words, saying: 'Don't
make me go back, Zeus' nursling! Let me stay here!
I know you'll never come back yourself, or rescue
any of your lost comrades! Let's get out now, with those that are here-we still may escape the day of doom!'
"So he spoke;
and I responded to him, saying: 'Eurylochos you,
yourself can remain here, right where you are, quite safe, eating and drinking beside the black hollow ship; but go I myself must; a most powerful need is upon me.'
"So saying, I went my way, up from the ship and the sea.
I'd passed through the sacred glens, and was near the great
house of Kirke, that expert in the use of countless drugs, when Hermes met me, god of the golden wand,
on my way to the house, in the likeness of a young man with the first down on his face, when the charm of youth
is greatest. He took my hand, and said: 'Where are you off to
again, you hapless man, in the highlands, all alone,
and ignorant of the country? Your comrades in Kirke's house are caged up as pigs in her imprisoning sties. Are you
coming here to release them? I tell you, you yourself
will never escape, you'll end up caught like the rest!
But see now, I shall free you from harm, and save you- Here, take this potent herb, have it with you when you go to Kirke's house: it'll keep the evil day from your head!
And I'll tell you all Kirke's malevolent wiles: she'll make you
a mixed posset,adding in drugs along with the foodstuff.
Yet not even so will she contrive to bewitch you: the potent herb that I'll give you won't let her. And I'll tell you all
you must do. When Kirke strikes you with her long wand, draw your sharp sword from beside your thigh, as though
with intent kill her. Then she, overcome by terror,
will invite you to bed down with her, make love together. You must not, at this point, refuse the bed of the goddess if you want her to free your comrades and provide for you; but make her swear a great oath by the blessed gods
to plan no more nasty trouble against your person,
lest when she has you naked she'll weaken and unman you.'
"So saying, the slayer of Argos gave me the herb, pulling it out of the ground, and showed me its nature.
At its root it was black, but its flower was white as milk:
Moly is what the gods call it: it's hard for mortal men
to dig up; but the gods can do whatever they've a mind to.
"Hermes now departed to lofty Olympos, going
up through the tree-clad island, while I made my way to Kirke's house, my heart in a turmoil as I went.
I stood in the forecourt of the fine-tressed goddess
and standing there called to her. The goddess heard my voice, at once came out, flung open the shining doors
and invited me in. Much troubled at heart, I entered.
She led me in and seated me on a silver-studded chair- beautiful, finely crafted, with a footstool for my feet.
Then she mixed me a posset in a golden cup,
but slipped a drug into it, with malevolence in her heart. When she gave it to me, and I drank it, yet was not bewitched, she struck me with her wand, and had this word for me, saying: 'Off to the sty with you! Lie there with your other comrades!'
"So she spoke. I drew the sharp sword from beside my thigh, and charged at Kirke, as though with intent to kill her.
She gave a loud scream, slipped under my charge, embraced
my knees, and, sobbing, addressed me with winged words, saying:
'Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents?
I'm amazed that you drank my drug and were not bewitched!
No other man, ever, has failed to succumb to this drug
once he'd drunk it, once it had passed the barrier of his teeth! Truly, the mind in your breast is proof against all enchantment.
You must be resourceful Odysseus, who-so the slayer of Argos,
he of the golden wand, always told me-would visit here in his swift black ship, on his way back home from Troy! So come, sheath your sword, let the two of us now go up into my bed, and by mingling there together
in the passion of love, find trust, each one in the other.'
"So she spoke; but I answered her thus, with a question, saying: 'Kirke, how can you tell me to come and make love with you,
when you've turned my comrades to swine, right here in your halls, and now you have me here, with malign intent you want me
to go up into your chamber and your bed, so that when
you have me naked you can weaken and unman me? Never would I agree to come anywhere near your bed unless you, goddess, were to swear me a mighty oath
that you'd plan no more malicious trouble against my person.'
"So I spoke. She at once swore the oath as I requested.
But not till she'd sworn, and completed the oath in full, would I agree to go up into Kirke's sumptuous bed.
Meanwhile her handmaids were busy around the halls- four of them, those who did all the housework in her home:
nymphs, these, daughters of the springs and the groves,
of the sacred rivers that flow to their outfall by the sea.
One was hanging fine purple cloths on the headrests
of chairs and under them spreading white linen foot mats; another was setting up silver tables beside the chairs
and arranging golden baskets upon them; the third
of these serving women was mixing sweet mind-honeying wine in a silver bowl and setting out golden goblets.
The fourth had fetched in water and lit a blazing fire beneath a great cauldron: the water was getting hot.
When it reached boiling point in the bright bronze vessel,
she got me into a bath, sluiced me down from the cauldron, mixing hot and cold to my taste, bathing head and shoulders to ease from my limbs their heart-crushing weariness.
After she'd bathed me, and massaged me with rich oil,
she provided me with a splendid mantle and tunic,
brought me back, and seated me on a silver-studded chair- elegant, finely wrought-with a footstool for my feet.
A maid brought hand-washing water in a beautiful golden pitcher and poured it into a silver basin for me
to wash with and drew up beside me a polished table.
The respected housekeeper now set bread beside me, with many side dishes, giving freely of her supplies. Then she told me to eat, but I was not so minded:
I sat brooding on other things: my heart sensed trouble.
"Now when Kirke saw me thus sitting, not reaching out
for food, and overmastered by deep-felt distress, she came
and stood close beside me, addressed me with winged words, saying: 'Odysseus, why are you sitting there like some voiceless person, eating your heart out, touching neither food nor drink?
Do you maybe anticipate some new trick? You don't need
to be afraid: I've already sworn that powerful oath.'
"So she spoke: but to her I then responded, saying: 'Kirke, tell me, what kind of man is it, in his right mind, could bear
to taste food or drink before he'd secured freedom
for his comrades, had seen them with his own eyes? If you
really mean it when you tell me to eat and drink, then free them! And let me set eyes myself on these, my trusty comrades.'
"So I spoke. Kirke now made her way out through the hall, wand in hand, flung open the doors of the sty, and drove
my men out, embodied as hogs some nine years old. They stood there before her, and she went in among them,
anointing each one with a different magic salve, so that the bristles earlier grown there by the deadly drug
that the lady Kirke had given them now sloughed off their limbs:
men they became again, more youthful than previously, a great deal more handsome, much taller in their carriage.
They recognized me: each one of them clung to my hands.
A yearning for lamentation came on us all, and the house echoed terribly round us: the goddess herself felt pity.
"Then she, bright among goddesses, approached me and said:
'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus, go down now to your swift ship, there on the seashore.
First thing of all, haul your vessel high up upon the beach, then store all your goods and equipment in the caves,
then come back yourself and bring your trusty comrades.'
"So she spoke, and my proud spirit was persuaded.
I made my way down to the swift ship and the seashore, and there by the swift ship I found my trusty comrades lamenting piteously and shredding big tears. As country
calves will come frisking about a herd of cows
on their way back to the dung yard, replete with fodder-
in a mass they confront them, the pens no longer contain them, and endlessly lowing they keep scampering round
their mothers-so these men, when they set eyes upon me,
thronged round me weeping: it seemed to them in their hearts
as though they'd got back to their homeland, to the actual township of rugged Itháke where they were born and bred. Lamenting now they addressed me with winged words, saying: 'We're as delighted, Zeus' nursling, by your return, as if
we'd got back home to Itháke, to our native country!
But come now, tell us the fate of our other companions.'
"So they spoke, and I gave them a reassuring response: 'First thing of all, haul our vessel high up upon the beach, then store all our goods and equipment in the caves.
That done, you-all of you-come quickly along with me
to the sacred halls of Kirke, where you'll see your comrades eating and drinking, from a never-failing abundance.'
"So I spoke, and they were quick to obey my instructions. Only Eurylochos tried to hold back all our comrades,
and addressed them with winged words, saying: 'You wretched
creatures, where are we going? Why long for these troubles, when going down into Kirke's domain will surely transform each one of us into swine or wolves or lions, condemned, under obligation, to guard her great abode?
That's how the Kyklops acted when our comrades entered
his farmstead and headstrong Odysseus went in with them: it was through this man's recklessness that they too perished.'
"So he spoke; I debated in my mind then whether I should unsheathe the long sword from beside my sturdy thigh,
and cut off his head with it, lay him low, although
close kin by marriage he was to me; but my comrades one after another with honey-sweet words restrained me:
'Scion of Zeus, give the order, and we'll leave this man here to stay by the ship and to guard it; but as for us,
what we want is for you to lead us to Kirke's sacred abode.'
"So saying, they started off then, up from the ship and the sea; nor was Eurylochos left behind by the hollow ship,
but came with the rest of us, fearing my strong reproof.
"Meanwhile, back in her house, Kirke with loving care
bathed the rest of my comrades, massaged them with rich oil,
and dressed them up in fine wool mantles and tunics;
we found them all having a good dinner there in her halls. But when my men saw and recognized one another,
they wept and lamented: the house reechoed around them.
Then she, bright among goddesses, approached me and said:
'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
no longer need you all raise this loud lament! I too know
the sum of the troubles you suffered out on the fish-rich deep and every wrong that's been done you by hostile men on land.
But come now, eat your food and drink your wine, until
you once more recover that spirit you had in your breasts to begin with when you set out from your native land
of rugged Itháke-but now you're worn and dispirited, forever recalling your rough wandering, nor has your heart
known any joy, since indeed you've suffered greatly.'
"So she spoke, and our proud spirits consented, and day after day, for the course of a whole year we sat there feasting on plentiful meat and wine. but when a year had passed, as the turning seasons
of the months went by, and the long days came to an end,
then my trusty companions assailed me with their complaints: 'Are you out of your mind? High time to think of your homeland
if it's truly your destiny to be saved and to return
to your high-roofed house and to your own native country.'
"So they spoke, and my proud spirit consented.
So all day long until the setting of the sun
we sat there feasting on plentiful meat and sweet wine; but when the sun went down and darkness came on, and they retired to sleep along the shadowy halls,
then I myself went up into Kirke's sumptuous bed
and clasped her knees in entreaty. The goddess heard and listened. I addressed her with winged words, saying:
'Kirke, fulfill for me now the promise you made, that you'd convey me home: my spirit's eager to be on its way,
likewise the rest of my comrades, who nag me to death
as they grieve around me, whenever you're somewhere else.'
"So I spoke. Bright among goddesses, she at once replied: 'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
you all need stay in my house no longer against your will;
but there is another journey you must accomplish first:
you must go to the realm of Hades and dread Persephone, to consult the ghostly spirit of Theban Teiresias,
blind seer, whose reasoning mind remains intact, since on him alone, when dead, Persephone bestowed full mental powers: the rest are only flitting shadows.'
"So she spoke. But the spirit within me was shattered: I wept as I sat on the bed, and my heart no longer had any desire to live, to behold the sunlight.
But when I'd had my fill of weeping and agonizing,
I found the words to reply with, and addressed her, saying:
'Kirke, who will serve as our guide upon this journey? No one yet in a black ship has ever voyaged to Hades.'
"So I spoke. She, bright among goddesses, at once replied: 'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus, don't worry about installing a pilot aboard your ship-
Just set up your mast, spread your white sail, and then sit down, and let the north wind carry you onward!
But when in your ship you've traversed the stream of Ocean,
and come to a wooded shore and the groves of Persephone,
with their tall poplars, and willows that shed their fruit,
there beach your vessel, close by deep-eddying Ocean, and yourself go on to the dank domain of Hades. There it is that into Acheron Pyriphlegethon flows,
and Kokytos, that branches off from the waters of Styx:
a rock marks the confluence of these two loud rivers.
Go close in there, hero, exactly as I instruct you, and dig out a pit, about a cubit deep and wide, and around it pour a libation to all the dead- first with milk and honey, then with sweet wine,
and thirdly with water: sprinkle white barley on it,
and entreat the weak heads of the dead with many vows- that when you're back on Itháke you'll sacrifice the best barren heifer in your domain, load the pyre with good things, and, just for Teiresias, you'll make a sacrifice
of an all-black ram, the finest one in your flocks.
Then, when you've supplicated the famous tribes of the dead, you must slaughter a ram and a black ewe, making them face toward Erebos, while you turn your back on them, reach out to the streams of the river. This is the place where many
ghosts of those who have perished will now gather.
At that point arouse your comrades, and command them to take the sheep that lie there, slain by the ruthless bronze, and flay and burn them, along with prayers to the gods- strong Hades and dread Persephone. You yourself,
drawing the keen-edged sword from beside your thigh,
must sit there, and not allow the weak heads of the dead to get near the blood until you've questioned Teiresias. The seer will then quickly approach you, leader of men: He will show you your route, explain your journey's stages,
your homecoming, how you're to traverse the fish-rich deep.'
"So she spoke; and at once the golden-throned Dawn arose.
She gave me a mantle to wear, and a tunic; and she, the nymph, dressed herself in a long white robe, made of finely
woven and beautiful stuff, and around her waist
knotted a fine golden sash, set a veil on her head.
Now I went through the house and aroused my comrades
with kindly words, approaching each man in turn:
'Lie no longer in bed enjoying sweet slumber! Time for us to be going! Lady Kirke has briefed me fully.'
"So I spoke, and their proud spirits consented. Yet not
even from there could I get my comrades away
without loss. The youngest, Elpenor-neither outstanding in battle nor yet particularly bright-minded-had
lain down apart from his comrades in Kirke's house,
in search of cool air, being heavy with wine, on the roof.
Hearing the noise and clatter of his comrades stirring he got up suddenly, and, quite forgetting that he should make his way back down by way of the long ladder,
fell headlong off the roof: his neck was snapped through
at the spine, and his ghost went down to Hades' realm.
"As my men were bustling about I spoke among them, saying: 'You may think you're on the way to your own dear country, but Kirke's informed me we must first make another journey, to the realm of Hades and of dread Persephone, there
to consult the ghostly spirit of Theban Teiresias.'
"So I spoke, and their spirit was shattered within them, they sat down wherever they were, and wailed, and tore their hair; but all their lamenting accomplished nothing for them.
"While we were on our way to the swift ship and the seashore,
full of sorrow and shedding big tears, meanwhile
Kirke had gone on ahead of us and tethered there, by the black ship, a ram and a black ewe, overtaking us easily; when gods don't desire it, who can witness their passage, either coming or going?"


BOOK 11

"But when we came down to the ship and the sea, first off we hauled our vessel into the bright salt water, and then stepped the mast, set the sail in the black ship, and took the sheep and put them aboard, and ourselves embarked,
full of sorrow and shedding big tears. For us
in the wake of our dark-prowed vessel a following breeze that filled our sail, a trusty companion, was sent us
by fair-tressed Kirke, dread goddess of mortal speech.
So when we'd secured the tackle throughout the ship we then
sat down, leaving wind and steersman to keep her on her course.
All day long her sail spread taut as she sheared through the deep, till the sun went down and all the ways were in shadow.
She came to the boundary marked by deep-flowing Ocean, where are the land and settlement of the Kimmerians,
enveloped in mist and cloud: upon them never
does the bright-gleaming sun look down with his rays, either while he's climbing into the starry heavens
or when he turns back again from heaven to earth, but deathly night's spread out over hapless mortals.
"There we now came, and beached our ship. Unloading
the sheep, we made our way beside the stream of Ocean until we reached the place of which Kirke had told us. There Perimedes and Eurylochos held the victims,
while I unsheathed the sharp sword from beside my thigh,
and dug out a pit, about a cubit deep and wide,
and around it poured a libation to all the dead- first with milk and honey, then with sweet wine,
and thirdly with water: I sprinkled white barley in it, besought the weak heads of the dead with many vows-
that when I was back on Itháke I'd sacrifice the best
barren heifer in my domain, load the pyre with good things, and, for Teiresias only, would offer a sacrifice
of an all-black ram, the finest one in my flocks.
Then, when with vows and prayers I'd made my entreaties
to the tribes of the dead, I took the sheep, cut their throats
over the pit. The dark blood flowed, there came up out from Erebosthe shades of corpses dead and buried:
brides, still-unmarried youths, toil-worn old men, tender young girls, their hearts still new to sorrow,
and many with wounds inflicted by bronze-tipped spears,
men slain while fighting, still in their bloodstained armor- many crowding around the pit from every quarter
with an eerie clamor. Pale fear took possession of me.
But still I called my companions, gave them orders to take
the sheep that lay there, slain by the ruthless bronze,
and flay and burn them, along with prayers to the gods- strong Hades and holy Persephone. I myself, unsheathing the sharp sword from beside my thigh,
sat there, and would not allow the weak heads of the dead
to come near the blood until I'd questioned Teiresias.
"The first shade to come was that of my comrade Elpenor.
Not yet had he been interred beneath the wide-traveled earth, for we'd left his body behind in Kirke's hall, unwept
and unburied, since this other business was what now drove us.
On seeing him I wept, and my heart felt pity for him,
and speaking with winged words, I addressed him, saying: 'Elpenor, how did you come here through the murky darkness? You traveled faster on foot than I in my black ship.'
"So I spoke. He groaned, and responded to me, saying:
'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
some god's ill-will undid me-that, and too much wine! When I lay down to sleep in Kirke's house I forgot
I must make my way back down by the long ladder,
so fell headlong off the roof: my neck was snapped through
at the spine; my shade went down to Hades' realm.
Now I beseech you, by those left behind who are not here, by your wife, by the father who cared for you as an infant,
by Telemachos, whom you left as the sole child in your halls- I know when you go on from here, leave the realm of Hades,
you'll put in, with your well-built ship, at the isle of Aiaia.
It's there, my lord, that I need your remembrance most-
Don't abandon me there unwept, unburied, lest I become the occasion of some god's wrath against you! Burn me there, I beg you, with such armor as I possess,
and heap me a burial mound by the shore of the grey sea,
for those yet unborn to learn of an unfortunate man.
Do this for me, and set on my tomb the oar
with which I rowed, when alive, among my comrades.'
"So he spoke, and I then answered him, saying: 'All this,
unhappy man, I'll most surely carry out on your behalf.'
"So the two of us sat there, exchanging these grim words, I on one side with my sword held over the blood,
on the other, addressing me, the wraith of my companion.
"Then there drew near the ghost of my dead mother,
Antikleia, daughter of great-hearted Autolykos,
whom I'd left alive when I first sailed for sacred Ilion. On seeing her I wept, and pitied her in my heart;
Yet not even so, for all my deep sorrow, would I
let her come near the blood till I'd questioned Teiresias.
And then he came, did the ghost of Theban Teiresias,
gold staff in hand, and he recognized and addressed me:
'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
why, hapless man, have you turned your back on the sunlight and come to gaze on the dead and their joyless region?
Stand back from the pit, and take your sharp sword away,
so I can drink of the blood, and speak words of truth to you.'
"So he spoke, and I drew back, returning my silver-studded sword to its sheath; only when he'd drunk the dark blood did the matchless seer address me, saying: 'Great Odysseus,
you want to know all about your sweet homecoming.
This a god will make hard for you: I do not foresee
you escaping the Earth-Shaker's notice. He holds a grudge against you, is wrathful because you blinded his dear son. Yet even so you can make it, though after much hardship,
if you're willing to curb your own and your comrades' spirits
from the moment you put in with your well-built ship, forsaking the violet deep, to the isle of Thrinakie
and find there at pasture the cattle and well-fed sheep of Helios, the all-seeing, all-hearing sun. If you
leave these unharmed and take care over your return
you may still get home to Itháke, after much suffering; but should you harm them, then I foresee destruction
for your ship and your comrades. You yourself may escape,
but you'll get home late and in bad shape, your comrades all lost,
in a ship not your own, find troubles plaguing your house-
arrogant fellows installed there, devouring your livelihood, wooing your godlike wife and sending her bridal gifts!
Indeed, when you come you'll avenge their violent conduct, but when you've killed off the suitors in your halls,
whether by guile or openly with the sharp bronze,
then you must set out again, taking a well-shaped oar, until you come among men who know nothing of the sea, who eat their food without putting salt in it,
and have never set eyes on ships with purple cheeks
or on the well-shaped oars that serve as a ship's wings;
and I'll tell you a very clear sign, one that won't escape you: when on the road you meet another man who believes
it's a winnowing-fan that you have on your sturdy shoulder, then fix your well-shaped oar on end in the ground,
and offer a lavish sacrifice to the lord Poseidon-
a ram, a bull, and a stud boar that mounts its sows. Then go back home, and make rich sacred offerings to the immortal gods who possess broad heaven,
in due order. Death will come to you from the sea,
the gentlest of ends, but will take you only after
you've worn out a sleek old age, with your people round you prospering. This that I tell you is the truth.'
"So he spoke, and I then responded to him, saying: 'Teiresias, it may be that the gods have spun this thread.
have always found the more obvious meaning attractively haunting in its deliberate mystery.
But come, now tell me this, and answer me truthfully:
I see before me the shade of my departed mother, sitting, silent, close to the blood. I am her own son,
yet she's not brought herself to look at me or address me! Tell me, my lord, how may she know me for who I am?'
"So I spoke, and at once he responded to me, saying:
'Very simple the answer I'll give you and put in your mind:
Whosoever of those that are dead and gone you permit
to come up to the blood will converse with you truthfully; but any that you refuse will go back to where they came from.'
"So saying, the ghost of the lord Teiresias departed
back to Hades' domain, after stating the gods' decrees; but I waited steadfastly there, until my mother
came up and drank the dark blood, and knew me at once, and addressed me sorrowfully, with winged words, saying:
'My child, how did you penetrate this murky darkness
while alive? Hard for the living to get to see these realms, for between them lie great rivers, awesome streams,
Ocean above all, which may in no wise be crossed on foot, but only with a well-found ship! Have your
long wanderings after Troy still brought you no further
than this with your ship and your comrades? Haven't you yet reached Itháke, or seen your wife and your own domain?'
"So she spoke, and I then responded to her, saying:
'My mother, need brought me down here to Hades' realm:
I had to consult the shade of Theban Teiresias.
Not yet have I come near Achaia, not yet have I set foot on my own land, I've been wandering, grief-stricken, since I first followed the godlike lord Agamemnon
to Ilion, home of fine horses, to fight against the Trojans.
But now tell me this, and give me a truthful answer:
What fated exit of death was it overcame you? Some wasting disease? Or did Artemis the archer with her gentle shafts assail you and lay you low?
Tell me, too, of the father and son I left behind there-
Are my privileges still with them, or does some other
man now possess them? Do they say I'll not return?
And what of my wedded wife? Her thoughts? Her plans?
Has she held on with her son? Kept everything as it was? Or is she now remarried, to the best man of the Achaians?'
"So I spoke, and my lady mother answered me at once: 'Truly indeed she holds on with steadfast spirit
there in your halls: for her the nights and days waste away in unending sorrow amid her tears.
As for your fine privileges, no man's assumed them, although
Telemachos now, unchallenged, possesses your acres,
and orders the common feasts, as is right for a lawgiver whom all men acknowledge. But your father stays away in the country, and never comes into town. He has
no bed with proper bedclothes, rugs and bright coverlets,
but sleeps in winter along with the slaves in the house,
in the ashes close to the fire, and wears old ragged clothes. But when summer comes, and flourishing autumn, then all over the rising slope of his vine-clad orchard
the ground is strewn with the fallen leaves for his bed.
There he lies in his sorrow, heart nursing one great grief,
yearning for your return: old age weighs heavy on him. Thus it was that I too perished and met my fate:
Neither in our abode did the deadly archer goddess lay me low in a visitation with her gentle shafts,
nor did any disease come upon me, the kind most likely
with loathsome wasting to sever the spirit from my limbs: it was rather my yearning for you, illustrious Odysseus,
for your wisdom, your kindness, that robbed me of sweet life.'
"So she spoke, and I wanted, pondering in my heart,
to embrace the ghost of my mother, now dead and gone:
three times I moved to clasp her, as my heart urged me, three times she eluded my arms, like some shadow or dream, so that the pain in my heart grew ever sharper,
and I spoke, addressed her with winged words, saying: 'Mother,
why won't you stay here when I want to hold you,
so that even in Hades the two of us can cast arms
about one another, and get our fill of chill lamentation?
Is this some phantom set on me by holy Persephone
to add yet more to the weight of my grief and sorrow?'
"So I spoke, and my lady mother answered me at once:
'Alas, my child, ill-fated beyond all other mortals, Persephone, daughter of Zeus, is in no way beguiling you. No, this is the fixed law for mortals, when anyone dies: The sinews no longer keep flesh and bones together,
they're destroyed by the powerful force of blazing fire
as soon as the spirit departs from the white bones and the soul, like a dream, flies fluttering off, is gone.
But quick, hurry back to the light now, with all these things stored in your mind, to tell your wife hereafter.'
"So we two conversed together, and now the women
approached us, those sent up by holy Persephone,
all those who had been great chieftains' wives or daughters. In throngs now they all gathered around the dark blood while I considered how I should question each individual.
And this, to my mind, emerged as the best plan:
I drew the long sword from beside my sturdy thigh
and would not let them all drink the dark blood together. So they approached me in turn, one after the other.
Each told me her lineage. I interrogated them all.
"Now the first one that I saw there was high-born Tyro,
who said she was descended from peerless Salmoneus, and declared herself the wife of Aiolos' son Kretheus. She fell in love with divine Enipeus, the river,
loveliest of all rivers that discharge their streams on earth,
and she used to haunt Enipeus' beautiful waters.
Assuming Enipeus' form, the Earth-Shaking Earth-Supporter lay with her at the outflow of the eddying river,
and the dark wave stood up round them like a mountain, arching over, concealing the god and the mortal woman.
He undid her virgin sash, shed sleep down on her,
then, when the god had completed the actions of love, he clasped her hand and addressed her, saying: 'Lady,
be glad of this lovemaking! As the time of the year comes round you will bear fine offspring: not issueless are the couplings
of the immortals! Look after these children, raise them.
For now, though, go back home, keep quiet, say nothing. But know that I am Poseidon, the Earth-Shaker!'
"So saying, he plunged down into the billowing deep. And she indeed conceived, gave birth to Pelias and to Neleus,
who grew to become strong henchmen of mighty Zeus,
both of them: Pelias dwelt in Iolkos' broad terrain, with a wealth of flocks, and Neleus in sandy Pylos. Other sons this queen among women bore to Kretheus: Aison, Pheres, Amythaon the joyful chariot fighter.
"After her I saw Antiope, daughter of Asopos,
who boasted that she'd slept in the arms of Zeus himself, and bore him twin sons, Amphion and Zethos, who first laid the foundations of seven-gated Thebai,
and walled it about, since lacking walls they could not
dwell in broad-landed Thebai, powerful though they were.
"After her I saw Alkmene, Amphitryon's bedfellow,
she who conceived Herakles-bold fighter, lion-hearted- when she embraced and coupled with mighty Zeus.
Megare too I saw, high-spirited Kreion's daughter,
wife to Amphitryon's son, a man of unwearied strength.
"Oedipus' mother I saw, the beautiful Epikaste,
who unwittingly did a most terrible deed: she married her own son: he wed her after killing his father.
Straightaway the gods revealed all this to mankind.
Yet he in his much-loved Thebai, though racked with grief,
by the gods' grim design still reigned over the Kadmeians, while she went down to the realm of Hades, strong gatekeeper, after hanging a sheer noose from the lofty ceiling,
this act.
possessed by her grief, bequeathing him countless woes, all that a mother's Furies might bring to pass.
"And I saw
the exquisite Chloris, that woman whom Neleus once
wed for her looks, when he'd brought her endless bridal gifts; youngest daughter she was of Amphion, Iasos' son-
who once in Minyan Orchomenos ruled with a forceful hand-
and queen of Pylos too: she bore him illustrious children:
Nestor and Chromios, Periklymenos the much-honored,
and besides these she bore gorgeous Pero, a wonder to mortals. Her all the men living round sought in marriage. But Neleus would bestow her on him alone who drove from Phylake
the broad-browed crumple-horned cattle of powerful Iphikles- a hard lot they were, and none but the matchless seer
undertook to drive them off; but a hard fate set by the god hampered him: that, and tough shackles, and those country
cowherds.
Nevertheless, when the months and days were completed
of the circling year, and the seasons in turn came round, he was let go by powerful Iphikles, once he'd told him
all the divine decrees. And a plan of Zeus was fulfilled.
"Lede also I saw, the bedfellow of Tyndareus,
who bore to Tyndareus a pair of stout-hearted sons,
horse-breaker Kastor and Polydeukes the skilled boxer.
Both these, though living, the life-giving earth enfolds: even beneath the earth they have honor from Zeus- in turn, on alternate days, they live and are dead.
The honors bestowed upon them match those of the gods.
"After her I saw Iphimedeia, Aloeus' bedfellow,
who claimed she'd coupled in passion with Poseidon.
Two sons she bore, but both of them were short-lived: Otos, a match for a god, and far-famed Ephialtes,
who were the tallest men that this grain-rich earth yet bred,
and the best-looking by far after renowned Orion.
At nine years old they measured a full nine cubits in breadth, and were nine fathoms tall. They even made threats against the immortals on Olympos,
that they'd start up the conflict of impetuous warfare!
Ossa they longed to pile on Olympos, and on Ossa
leaf-rippling Pelion, to scale the heights of heaven!
And this they'd have done, had they come to full adulthood; But the son of Zeus, whom neat-haired Leto bore, slew them:
both of them-this before the down grew beneath their temples,
or covered their chins with a thick and healthy stubble.
"And Phaidre and Prokris I saw, and beautiful Ariadne, bloody-minded Minos' daughter, whom Theseus once brought out of Krete to take to the hill of sacred Athens, but had no joy of her, since before that Artemis slew her
on sea-girt Die, because of Dionysos' indictment.
"Maira I saw, and Klyméne, and loathsome Eriphyle,
who took precious gold in exchange for her own husband- But I neither can tell of nor name all the women I saw,
the wives and daughters of heroes; long before that
the immortal night would be gone. Now is the time
for sleep-either going aboard your swift ship to its crew
or here. My conveyance will be the gods' concern, and yours."
So he spoke: every one of them sat hushed and silent, enthralled by his words, throughout the shadowy hall.
White-armed Arete was the first to comment, saying:
"Phaiakians, how does this man's character strike you? His looks, his stature, his equable inner mind?
Besides, he's my guest, though you all share that honor:
So don't rush to send him away, or to cut short our gifts
to one in such need; you have plentiful possessions
stored in your halls through the good will of the gods."
Then there spoke up among them the old hero Echeneos, the most aged of all the Phaiakian elders, saying:
"My friends, not wide of the mark or of our own thinking
is what our wise queen just said: pay attention to it-
though it's on Alkinoös here that both word and deed depend."
Alkinoös then responded to him, saying: "Her words shall indeed hold good, just as surely as I am alive
and lord over all the Phaiakians, those lovers of the oar!
But let our guest, despite his yearning to get back home,
bear to stay till tomorrow, until I can render all
our gift-giving complete. His conveyance shall be the concern of all men, but mine above all, since I hold the power here."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Lordly Alkinoös, exalted above all people, should you
ask me to stay on here for a whole year, prior to organizing my conveyance, and giving me splendid gifts, that too would I accept: it would profit me far more
to return with a fuller hand to my own country: then
I would get a warmer and more respectful welcome
from all men who saw that I'd come home to Itháke."
Alkinoös then responded to him, saying: "Odysseus, on looking at you, indeed we do not suppose
that you're the kind of cheat or trickster that's bred
by the black earth in large numbers, itinerant men
who fashion false tales from what no man could really see! But you have a way with words and an excellent mind, and you told your tale skillfully, just as a minstrel does: the grim troubles of all the Argives, and your own.
But come, tell me this, and give me a truthful answer:
Did you see any of those-your godlike comrades-
who went out to Ilion with you, and met their end there? The night before us is long, near endless, it's not yet time for sleep in the hall. Tell me more of your marvelous story!
I could hold out till bright dawn, if you'd only endure
to continue the tale of your troubles, here in the hall."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Lord Alkinoös, exalted above all people, there's
a time for long stories, and a time for sleep. But if
you're still eager to listen, I wouldn't begrudge you
the telling of other matters yet more piteous than these- the troubles of my companions, who perished later,
after escaping the Trojans' grim battle cry: they died on the way home, through a wicked woman's will.
"After holy Persephone scattered the female souls
of the women hither and thither, in all directions, there came up the ghost of Atreus' son Agamemnon,
grieving; and round him clustered the ghosts of all those who'd died and met their fate with him in Aigisthos' house.
He knew me at once, as soon as he'd drunk the dark blood: he was weeping aloud, and shedding big tears. He stretched
his hands out toward me, eager to reach and touch me, but no longer did he have strength or vigor remaining in his limbs as once, when they were live and supple.
"When I saw him I wept, and pitied him in my heart, and spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying:
'Most renowned son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, what fate of long-grief-giving death was it overcame you?
Was it Poseidon destroyed you aboard your vessels
by stirring up the dread blast of hard-blowing gales?
Or did hostile men work your destruction on dry land when you were lifting their cattle and fine fleecy sheep or fighting them for their city and for their women?'
"So I spoke; and he at once responded to me, saying:
'Scion of Zeus, Laërtes' son, resourceful Odysseus,
neither did Poseidon destroy me aboard my ships by stirring up the dread blast of hard-blowing gales,
nor did hostile men work my destruction on dry land: Aigisthos it was fixed my death and destiny, slew me-
he, with my damnable wife-as a guest in his house
for dinner, the way one slaughters an ox at its manger.
So I died a most piteous death, and round me all my comrades were killed without mercy, like so many white-tusked hogs
in the house of a wealthy and highly powerful man
for a wedding or communal feast, or some sumptuous banquet.
Before now you'll have witnessed the killing of many men, slain in single combat or the violent crush of battle,
but this sight would have stirred the most pity in your heart- how all about the mixing bowl and the laden tables
we lay in that hall, and the whole floor swam with blood.
The most piteous cry I heard was that of Priam's daughter Kassandre, murdered by treacherous Klytaimnestra
as she clung to me. I, fallen, raised my arms in self-defense and, dying, flung them about the sword. That bitch
turned her back, could not be bothered, though I was on
my way to Hades, to close my eyes or my gaping mouth. There's nothing more frightful or shameless than a woman who conceives the idea of such misdeeds in her heart,
like the horrifying act that this woman planned, contriving
her own wedded husband's murder. I honestly believed
that my return home would be welcomed by my children and household. But she, mind set upon utter evil,
has brought shame both on herself and on women yet unborn- the whole female sex, even those of faultless conduct.'
"So he spoke, and I then responded to him, saying:
'Alas, far-seeing Zeus has nursed a fearsome hatred against Atreus' whole line, by means of women's wiles, from the start: for Helen's sake large numbers of us died,
and Klytaimnestra ensnared you when you were far away.'
"So I spoke. He at once responded to me, saying:
'That's why you should never go easy, even with your wife! Don't tell her every thought you have in your head:
Tell her some only, keep the rest of them well hidden!
Still, your own death, Odysseus, will not come from your wife:
thoroughly sensible, her mind full of virtuous thoughts
is Ikarios' daughter, prudent Penelope, whom we left behind there as a bride, a young wife lately wed,
when we went off to the war: she had a child at the breast, a baby son, who now must sit numbered among the men
and is lucky, for his own father will return and see him,
and the boy will embrace his father, as is right and proper.
But that bedfellow of mine did not even let me feast my eyes on my son: before that she'd murdered me. Another thing, too, I'll tell you, and you lay it to heart:
In secret, not openly, hold your vessel on her course
to your native shore: no more is there faith in women. But come, tell me this, and give me a truthful answer: Have you heard any news of my son, that he's still alive in Orchomenos maybe, or out at sandy Pylos
or perhaps with Menelaös in broad Sparta?-for not yet
has any place on this earth witnessed noble Orestes' death.'
"So he spoke, and I then responded to him, saying:
'Son of Atreus, why ask me this? I have no knowledge
of whether he's dead or alive. Empty guesses are pointless.'
"While we two stood together exchanging grim words,
with lamentation, and shedding many big tears, there came up the ghost of Peleus' son Achilles, and those of Patroklos, and of peerless Antilochos, and Aias, unmatched for handsomeness and stature
among all the Danaäns save for Peleus' peerless son.
The ghost of Aiakos' swift-footed grandson knew me,
and sorrowfully addressed me with winged words, saying: 'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
rash man, what yet greater deed will your mind think up?
How dared you come down to Hades, where reside
the mindless dead, the phantoms of outworn mortals?'
"So he spoke; and I then responded to him, saying:
'Achilles, Peleus' son, most valiant of the Achaians,
I came out of need for Teiresias, if maybe he could tell me
some plan that would get me home to rugged Itháke.
Not yet have I come near Achaia, not yet have I set foot
on my own land, but have endless trouble. No man, Achilles, was more blest than you in the past, nor shall be hereafter; for while you were living we Argives honored you equally
with the gods; and now you're here you exercise great power
over the dead. Your death is no cause for grief, Achilles.'
"So I spoke. He at once responded to me, saying:
'Don't talk up death to me, illustrious Odysseus!
I'd rather work as a field hand, a hireling, for some other
landless man who could just scrape a livelihood together than be lord over all the corpses who've ever perished!
But come, tell me the news about that fine son of mine- has he gone off to war, and made it as champion, or not? And have you had any news about Peleus? If so, tell me-
Is he still honored among the mass of the Myrmidons? Or do they show him no honor throughout Hellas and Phthie
now that old age has crippled him, hand and foot,
and I'm no longer there to help him, out in the sunlight, or strong, as once I was in the wide terrain of Troy
when I slew the best of their men while defending the Argives?
If I could come thus, only briefly, to my father's house
then I'd make my strength and invincible hands most bitter to any who show him violence and diminish his honor.'
"So he spoke, and I then responded to him, saying:
'In fact I've heard no news regarding flawless Peleus,
but about your dear son Neoptolemos I'll tell you
the whole truth, as you requested. I fetched him myself aboard my trim hollow vessel, brought him out
from Skyros to join the ranks of the well-greaved Achaians.
And when we were planning action around the city of Troy
he was always the first to speak, had never a bad idea: godlike Nestor and I alone came up with better ones.
Whenever we fought with the bronze out on the Trojan plain he'd never hold back among the main body of our troops,
but was always far out ahead, unrivaled in prowess,
and many the men he slaughtered in fearsome battle. I couldn't recount or name all the victims he slew,
all the many men he dispatched when fighting for the Argives- but one great man, Telephos' son, he felled with the bronze:
the hero Eurypylos, and with him a crowd of his Keteian
comrades all perished because of a woman's gifts.
No handsomer man I ever saw, except noble Memnon. And when we, the best of the Argives, were going into the Horse that Epeios made, all under my command-
when to wait, when we should spring our close-built ambush-
then the other Danaän chieftains and counselors
had to wipe away tears, the limbs of all were trembling, yet him I never once noticed with my own eyes
dabbing the tears from his cheeks, or his handsome features
losing their color; he kept on pleading with me
to let him out from the Horse, his hand was always
on his sword hilt or bronze-heavy spear, impatient to get at the Trojans. But when we'd sacked the steep citadel of Priam, he boarded his ship with a good prize-share of the booty-
and all unscathed, neither pierced by the sharp bronze
nor cut up in close combat, as so often happens
to men during battle: Ares rages in wild confusion.'
"So I spoke. The ghost of Aiakos' swift-footed grandson made off with long strides across the asphodel meadow,
happy because I told him his son had distinguished himself.
"The remaining shades of those who were dead and gone stood sadly there, all asking about their own concerns; of all of them, only the shade of Aias, Telamon's son, stood apart from the rest, still enraged by the victory
I'd won over him when we two competed by the ships
for Achilles' arms, a prize set up by his lady mother
with the sons of the Trojans and Pallas Athene as judges. Would that I'd never won the contest for such a prize, since over so rare a head the earth closed because of it-
that of Aias, whose beauty and deeds done outshone those
of all other Danaäns save for Peleus' peerless son.
To him I now spoke with words of conciliation: 'Aias, great Telamon's son, could you not, then, even in death,
abandon the wrath I roused in you over those fatal
arms, surely used by the gods to grieve the Argives,
such a tower of strength they lost in you! The Achaians still ceaselessly mourn your death, as they do the lost life of Achilles, Peleus' son. Yet no one's more to blame
than Zeus, with that terrible hatred he nursed against
the army of Danaän spearmen: this it was that doomed you.
Come close to me, lord, and listen to what I have to tell you! Overmaster your great fury, your arrogant spirit!'
"So I spoke, but he made me no answer, went after the other shades of the dead and departed to Erebos. Nevertheless
he might still, despite his wrath, have addressed me, or I him,
but the spirit within this breast of mine was still eager to see the shades of those others now dead and gone.
"Thereafter I saw Minos, Zeus' illustrious son, holding a golden scepter, sitting in judgment over
the dead, as they, sitting or standing, brought each case
before their lord, in Hades' wide-gated realm.
"After him I became aware of gigantic Orion, herding and driving across the meadows of asphodel
the wild beasts he'd killed himself on the lonely mountains,
with a club of bronze in his hands, forever unbroken.
"Tityos too I saw, Gaia's illustrious offspring,
lying on the ground, spread over nine whole acres, a vulture on either side of him tearing at his liver
and pecking into his guts; he'd no hands to beat them off
after forcing himself on Leto, Zeus' famed bedfellow,
in broad-lawned Panopeus, on her way to Pytho.
"I also saw Tantalos suffering painful torment,
as he stood in a pool, the water lapping his chin:
he was maddened with thirst, yet couldn't ever reach it,
for whenever the old fellow bent down to drink
the water was sucked down and vanished, and around his feet the black earth appeared, dried up by some god.
Trees too, high and leafy, hung top-heavy with fruit- pears, pomegranates, boughs laden with shining apples,
sweet figs, a profusion of olives. But every time the old man reached out to grasp them, a gust of wind
would whirl them aloft toward the shadowy clouds.
"I also saw Sisyphos suffering most painful torment,
as he labored to raise a huge stone with his two bare hands:
scrambling with hands and feet he'd try to push it up to the crest of the hill; but when he was on the point
of getting it over the top, its weight would defeat him: bumpity back to the plain the shameless stone would clatter.
Yet he kept straining and heaving, while the sweat streamed down
from his limbs, and the dust rose swirling around his head.
"After him I became aware of powerful Herakles,
[his phantom, for he himself among the immortal gods takes joy in the feast, and has the elegant-ankled Hebe, child of great Zeus and the golden-sandaled Here:]
around him arose a bird like clamor from the dead
as they scattered in terror, while he, as dark as night, holding a bare bow with an arrow at the string,
kept glancing sharply round him, as though about to shoot. A fearsome thing was the baldric girding his torso,
a belt of gold on which wondrous objects had been fashioned-
bears and wild boars, and lions with glinting eyes,
and fights and battles and murder and the slayings of men. May he never have crafted, or again craft, another such,
the man who stamped that belt with his special craftsmanship!
Herakles recognized me the moment he saw me,
and sorrowfully addressed me with winged words, saying: 'Son of Laërtes, scion of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
poor wretch, are you leading the kind of grim existence such as I too bore beneath the rays of the sun?
I was Kronos' son Zeus' offspring, and yet I suffered
woes beyond measure, for I was placed in subjection
to a man far worse man than myself,who laid hard labors on me. He even once sent me here to get Hades' hound:he could think of no harder labor for me than this. Yet that hound I did
indeed carry off and bring up out of Hades-
I had Hermes and grey-eyed Athene serving as my guides.'
"So saying, he went on his way, back into Hades' realm, but I remained firmly there,in case there might come up any more of the heroes who'd perished so long ago;
and I might indeed have seen men of old whom I wanted to-
Theseus, Peirithoös, famed progeny of the gods-
but before that, great swarms of the dead came thronging up with loud eerie cries, and pale terror gripped me, the fear that the head of the Gorgon, that ghastly monster, might
be sent against me from Hades by holy Persephone.
"So at once I went back to the ship, and ordered my comrades to embark again themselves, and cast off the stern warps.
So they came aboard quickly, and sat down on the benches, and the current bore the ship fast down Ocean's river,
helped first by our rowing, and then by a following wind."


BOOK 12

"After our ship left the course of Ocean's river and came to the swelling waves of the wide-tracked sea, and the isle of Aiaia, where is the abode of Dawn, the early riser,
and her dancing floors, and the risings of Helios the sun,
then we beached our vessel, hauled her up on the sands,
and ourselves disembarked on the seashore. There we fell asleep, and stayed thus, awaiting the bright dawn.
"When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
I sent my companions off to Kirke's domain
to bring back the body of the deceased Elpenor.
Next we cut wood for his pyre and at the seaward tip
of the headland held his funeral, mourning and shedding tears. Then after his corpse was burned-along with its armor-
We heaped up a burial mound, raised a marker on it,
and on top of the tomb set up his well-shaped oar.
"So we busied ourselves with these matters, nor was Kirke unaware that we'd got back from Hades: very promptly she readied herself, and came out. The handmaids with her
brought bread and much meat, and tawny-red wine, and she,
bright among goddesses, now spoke in the midst of us, saying:
'Foolhardy men, who went down to Hades' realm alive, and met death twice, when others die only the once! But come now, you've food to eat and wine to drink the whole day through! Then, at the coming of Dawn,
you'll set sail. I'll show you your route and brief you
on every detail. That way, no ruinous bad decisions, at sea or ashore, will leave you in desperate trouble.'
"So she spoke: the proud spirit in us was persuaded.
The whole day long, then, till sunset we sat feasting
on abundant meat and sweet wine; but when the sun
went down, and darkness came on, then all the others
lay down to sleep beside the ship's stern warps;
but me Kirke took by the hand, led apart from my comrades, made me sit down, then questioned me in detail,
and I told her the whole story, just as it happened.
Thereupon the lady Kirke spoke at length to me, saying: 'All that, then, has been accomplished. Now listen to what I shall tell you: the god himself will remind you of it.
First off, you'll come to the Sirens. They bewitch
and beguile all mortals who come within earshot of them.
Any man who unwittingly gets close enough to hear the Sirens' voices will never again be surrounded
by wife and children greeting him on his return home; the Sirens will enchant him with their clear high singing
as they sit in a meadow, among great heaps of bones
from men's rotted bodies, the skin on them all shriveled. Row on past them, and stop up the ears of your comrades with beeswax-soften it first-so none of them can hear. But as for yourself, if you're determined to listen,
have them tie you, hand and foot, while upright, against
your swift ship's mast, in its step, with rope ends lashed to the mast itself, so you can hear and enjoy the Sirens.
But if you beg and command your comrades to release you, they are then to bind you more firmly with yet more bonds!
Then, when your comrades have rowed you beyond the Sirens,
from that point on, I'll no longer tell you in full detail which course is the one to follow, but you yourself must make up your mind. I shall give you two options.
On the one side are crags, overhanging, and against them
crash the great breakers of dark-eyed Amphitrite:
these crags the blessed gods call the Wandering Rocks. That way not even winged creatures go, not even the shy doves that carry ambrosia to Zeus the Father: the smooth- worn rock always snatches one at least of these away,
and the Father sends in another to restore the numbers.
No mortal vessel that tried it has ever got past those rocks- ship's timbers and human bodies are both together
carried off by the waves and gusts of destructive fire- save that one seafaring vessel which alone escaped them:
Argo, of worldwide fame, sailing home from Aietes-
and she too would soon have been slammed into those great crags had Here not steered her safe through, out of love for Jason.
'Next are the two headlands. One of them towers up
to broad heaven, with a sharp peak. Dark clouds surround it,
that never disperse: its summit never enjoys clear air,
not even in spring or autumn. There's not a man alive could scale that peak or set foot on its crest, not even were he endowed with a score of hands and feet,
for the rock is as smooth as though it had been polished.
Halfway up this headland there's a murky cavern
facing west, toward the dusk and Erebos. It's that way you should steer your hollow ship, illustrious Odysseus, from which hollow ship not even the strongest man could shoot an arrow up into that cave's interior.
There, in it, dwells Skylle, yelping most fearsomely;
Her voice may be only as loud as that of a newborn puppy, but she is an evil monster, the sight of whom would please nobody, were it even a god who encountered her.
A dozen legs she has, all waving in the air,
and six necks, very lengthy, and on every one of them
a horrible head, with three rows of teeth in each,
close-set and crowded, all full of black death. From below the waist her body is hidden inside the hollow cavern, but her heads she stretches out from that fearsome abyss
and goes fishing there, searches all around the rock face
for dolphin or dogfish or whatever larger creature
she can catch of the thousands loud Amphitrite breeds. Past her no sailors yet can boast of having voyaged unharmed, for with each of her heads she carries off
a man that she snatches out of his dark-prowed vessel.
'But the other headland, Odysseus, as you'll see, is lower- the two are close together, within easy bowshot-
and on it grows a great fig tree with luxuriant foliage. Beneath this divine Charybdis sucks in the dark water-
thrice daily she spews it out upward, thrice sucks it all back
with fearsome effect-may you never be there then!
Not even the Earth-Shaker could save you from destruction. Rather hold course close to Skylle's headland and quickly steer your ship past it, since it's far preferable
to lose six of your crew than for all of you to perish.'
"So she spoke, and I then responded to her, saying:
'Come, I beg you, goddess. Tell me this truthfully: Is there any way I can both get clear of deadly Charybdis
and stop the other, when she tries to snatch my comrades?'
"So I spoke, and she, bright among goddesses, snapped back:
'Foolhardy man, once again you're set on deeds of warfare and hardship! Will you not yield even to the immortal gods? Because she's not mortal, but an immortal evil, dread, disastrous, wild-and not to be fought with,
for there's no defense-best course is to flee from her.
For if you linger to arm yourself beside her rock
I fear she may once again dart out and assault you with as many heads, and seize as many men as before. So row past at speed, while calling upon Krataiïs,
Skylle's mother, who bore her to be a bane to mortals:
she then will stop her from making that second assault.
'So you'll come to the isle of Thrinakie. There at pasture are Helios' numerous cattle and well-fed flocks:
seven herds of oxen, and as many fine flocks of sheep,
with fifty head in each herd. They never bear young,
nor do they ever grow old. They're tended by goddesses, fair-tressed nymphs, Phaëthousa and Lampetie,
whom resplendent Neaira bore to Hyperion Helios.
These their lady mother, when she'd borne and reared them,
sent out to the isle of Thrinakie, to a distant life
tending their father's flocks and crumple-horned cattle.
If you leave these unharmed and take care over your return you may still get home to Itháke, after much suffering;
but should you harm them, then I foresee destruction
for your ship and your comrades. You yourself may escape,
though you'll get home late, in bad shape, your comrades all lost.'
"So she spoke, and then, golden-throned, the Dawn came up. She, bright among goddesses, departed up the island,
while I went back to the ship and aroused my comrades
to embark themselves and to cast off the stern warps;
they came aboard quickly and sat down at the benches, and in good order struck the grey salt deep with their oars. In the wake of our dark-prowed ship a following breeze that filled our sail, a trusty companion, was sent us
by fair-tressed Kirke, dread goddess of mortal speech.
So when we'd secured the tackle throughout the ship
we sat down: wind and steersman now kept her on her course.
"Then I finally, grieving at heart, addressed my comrades: 'Friends, since it's not right that one or two only should know
the gods' decrees that Kirke, bright among goddesses, told me,
I shall now relate them to you: it will be in that knowledge that we either die or escape, sidestepping death and fate.
First, the heavenly Sirens. She bids us keep well away from them, their singing, and their flowery meadow.
Me alone she wanted to hear them: you are to tie me fast
with harsh bonds, keep me upright in place against the mast, in its step, with rope ends lashed to the mast itself.
But if I beg and command my comrades to release me,
you are then to bind me more firmly with yet more bonds.'
"Thus I was passing on all the details to my comrades,
and meanwhile our well-built ship very soon arrived at the Sirens' isle, driven on by a following breeze.
Abruptly the wind now dropped, and was replaced
by a windless calm. Some god lulled the waves to sleep.
My comrades stood up, took down and furled the sail,
stowed it down in the hollow ship, then sat at the benches and whitened the water with their polished pinewood oars.
Now with the sharp bronze I cut a great wheel of wax into small bits, which I kneaded in my strong hands.
Soon the wax grew warm under their great pressure
and the rays of the sun god, Hyperion Helios.
With this wax I stopped up the ears of all my comrades,
and they bound me hand and foot, while standing, to the mast,
in its step, with rope ends lashed to the mast itself,
and then sat down, struck the grey salt deep with their oars.
"But when we were as far off as a man's shout carries, swiftly pursuing our course, the speeding ship did not,
as it neared, escape notice. The Sirens began their shrill song: 'Look in here on your way, famed Odysseus, the Achaians' pride:
put in with your ship, hear the song we two sing! Never yet
has any man rowed on past us in his black ship till he's heard the honey-sweet music that issues from our mouths,
and he voyages on rejoicing, his knowledge increased, for we
know all the toil and suffering that in the wide land of Troy Argives and Trojans endured through the will of the gods:
Indeed, we know all things that happen on the nurturing earth.'
"Such the words they uttered in their beautiful voices. My heart yearned to listen. I signaled my comrades to release me-
a nod with my eyebrows. They bent to their oars, rowed on.
Eurylochos and Perimedes both at once stood up,
bound me with further lashings, made them all tighter. But when they'd rowed past the Sirens, and no longer were their voices or their singing within earshot, then my loyal comrades at once removed the wax with which I'd blocked their ears, and released me from my bonds.
"But after we'd left that island, then very soon I saw smoke, and a heavy surf, and heard a thunderous noise.
The rowers were frightened, the oars slipped from their grasp and hung clattering in the riptide; the ship came to a halt
now they were no longer plying their shapely oar blades.
But I went through the ship encouraging my comrades
with kindly words, approaching each man in turn: 'My friends, we've not hitherto gone short on experience of trouble!
This danger we face now is no greater than when the Kyklops
by brute force and strength shut us up in his hollow cave-
even then, my courage, invention, and presence of mind freed us: this peril too, I think, we'll live to recall!
So now, please all do exactly as I command: you must
stay seated there at the rowlocks and with your oars strike the deep surf of the sea, so that maybe Zeus
will grant that we escape, steer clear of this evil fate.
And to you, steersman, I give this command: store it well in your memory-you control the hollow ship's helm!
Keep the ship well away from all this smoke and surf:
stay close to the headland, don't let her veer unnoticed
across to the other side, or you'll destroy us all.'
"So I spoke, and they promptly obeyed the commands I gave them. But not yet did I mention Skylle, that irremovable danger,
for fear lest my comrades, terrified, might abandon
their rowing, and cower together down in the hold.
It was now I forgot Kirke's troublesome instruction
that for no purpose whatsoever should I now arm myself. I put on my battle gear, I picked out two long spears,
and carrying them made my way to the vessel's foredeck,
from where, I figured, this rock-based Skylle would first
be glimpsed as she brought disaster to my comrades.
But nowhere could I discern her, and my eyes grew weary from searching every part of the murky rock face.
"So on through the narrow strait, lamenting, we sailed-and there
on one side was Skylle, on the other bright Charybdis
fearsomely sucking in the salt seawater: when she spewed it back out, like a cauldron over a blazing fire, she was all seething turbulence, and the flying spray was flung up so high that it rained down on the tops
of both headlands; when she sucked the salt seawater back,
she exposed her wild inner turmoil, while all around the rock roared: beneath it the bottom was revealed, black with sand. Pale fear now possessed my men, we gazed at Charybdis in terror, fearing destruction.
Skylle meanwhile snatched up from the hollow ship
six of my comrades, the strongest and most active. Though my eyes were on the swift ship and my company, I still caught a glimpse of their hands and feet above me as they were whirled aloft. They cried out aloud,
called me by name one last time in their anguish. As when
a fisherman with his long rod on a jutting rock throws down bits of bait as a lure when fish are scarce, and lets down into the deep the horn of a country ox,
then grabs the hooked gasping victim, flings it ashore-
so they were carried up, gasping, toward the rocks.
There at her entrance she devoured them, as they screamed and stretched out hands to me in their dire death struggle. That was the most piteous sight of all that ever I endured throughout my whole exploration of the paths of the deep.
"Then when we'd escaped the rocks and fearsome Charybdis
and Skylle, soon after that we arrived at the god's
matchless island, where were the splendid broad-browed cattle and numerous well-fed flocks of Hyperion Helios.
While still out at sea in my black ship, I could hear
the lowing of cattle on the way back to their farmstead
and the bleating of sheep; and into my mind now stole the words of the blind seer, of Theban Teiresias,
and of Aiaian Kirke, who most strongly advised me
to avoid the island of Helios, bright delight of mortals;
and then, grieved at heart, I spoke out among my comrades:
'Distressed though you are, my comrades, mark my words well while I tell you of the prophetic warning Teiresias uttered,
he and Aiaian Kirke: they most strongly advised me
to avoid the island of Helios, bright delight of mortals,
for there, she told me, was our most dreadful danger.
So, row our black ship straight on past this island.'
"So I spoke, and the spirit within them was broken. But at once Eurylochos responded to me in chilling language:
'You're a hard man, Odysseus, with rare strength: your limbs
never tire, every last bit of you is fashioned of iron:
you won't let your comrades, worn out by sleeplessness and toil, disembark, when we might indeed once more
on this sea-girt isle find the stuff for a tasty supper! But no, you're making us wander on through the speeding night,
steering away from this island over the murky deep!
It's night that breeds dangerous winds, the wreckers of ships- how indeed could we escape from utter destruction
should some sudden tearing gale bear down upon us
from the south or the storm-ridden west wind, which most often
break up ships in despite of the gods, their sovereign lords? No, let us now rather yield to black night, put in,
stay close by the black ship to prepare our supper, and then in the morning embark, sail out over the broad sea.'
"So Eurylochos spoke: the rest of my comrades applauded.
I saw now what kind of trouble some god had in store for us, and so I spoke and addressed him with winged words, saying:
'Eurylochos, you force my hand: I'm one man only. But listen: I want all of you here present to swear me a mighty oath,
that if we come on a herd of cattle, or a great flock
of sheep, no man will succumb to maleficent recklessness
and slaughter either a steer or a sheep. Rather show restraint and eat the food that immortal Kirke provided for us.'
"So I spoke. They at once swore not to, as I requested,
and when they had sworn and completed the oath, then we
moored our well-built ship inside the hollow harbor
near a freshwater spring, and my comrades disembarked from the ship and expertly then set about preparing supper.
But when they'd put from them the desire for food and drink, then they began to weep, recalling their dear shipmates
whom Skylle had snatched from the hollow ship and devoured,
and sweet sleep came upon them while they were weeping. But in the night's third watch, when the stars were setting, Zeus the cloud-gatherer raised a blustering wind against us with a tremendous tempest, sent storm clouds that hid
both land and sea: from heaven there sprang forth night.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
we dragged our ship to a roomy cave and made her fast there, where the nymphs had their fine dance floors, held their meetings. Then I called an assembly and addressed my comrades, saying:
'Friends, in our swift ship there is both food and drink:
so let's keep our hands off the cattle, lest we come to harm, for these cows and well-fed sheep belong to a dread god, Helios, who both sees and hears everything.
"So I spoke: and their proud hearts were persuaded. But after that
for an entire month nonstop the south wind blew,
and no other wind arose, apart from the east and south.
Now so long as the men still were getting food and red wine they kept their hands off the cattle, being anxious to stay alive; but when the provisions in the ship were all exhausted,
and they were driven by need to go in search of game-
fish or fowl, whatever might come to hand,
angling with bent hooks, for hunger wore down their bellies- then I went off up the island, to pray to the gods:
one of them possibly might show me the road to take.
So when going through the island I'd left my comrades,
I found shelter from the wind and washed my hands,
and prayed to all the gods that possess Olympos. But what they did was to shed sweet sleep upon my eyelids,
while Eurylochos was giving bad advice to my comrades:
'Distressed though you are, my comrades, mark my words well:
All kinds of death are loathsome to wretched mortals, but to die of starvation-that's the most pitiful of fates! Come, let's rather drive off the best of Helios' cattle, and sacrifice to the immortals who hold wide heaven!
And if ever we get to Itháke, our native country,
we'll at once build a lavish temple to Hyperion Helios, and fill it with plenty of high-class dedications!
And if he's angry with us because of his straight-horned cattle, and wants to destroy our ship, and the other gods agree,
I'd rather gulp down seawater and get it over
than starve to death slowly here on this desolate island.'
"So Eurylochos spoke, and my other comrades assented. At once they drove off the best cattle of Helios,
from nearby, since it wasn't far from our dark-prowed vessel
that his fine cows, broad of brow and crumple-horned,
were grazing. Around these they stood and prayed to the gods, with the fresh leaves they'd plucked from a tall oak's foliage, since they had no white barley aboard the well-benched ship. When they'd prayed and slit the cows' throats and flayed them,
they cut out the thighs, wrapped them up in a double layer
of fat, and placed above them cuts of raw meat. They had no wine left that they could pour over the blazing sacrifice, so they made libations with water, roasted the innards.
But when the thighs had been burnt and they'd tasted the entrails,
then they chopped up the rest and threaded it on spits.
It was now that sweet sleep retreated from my eyelids, and I set off back to our swift ship and the seashore.
But when, as I went, I came close to our shapely vessel, the sweet aroma of roast meat filled the air around me,
and I groaned and cried out aloud to the immortal gods:
'Zeus, Father, and you other blessed gods that are forever,
it was indeed to my ruin that you lulled me with pitiless sleep while the comrades I'd left behind committed this monstrous act!'
"At once to Hyperion Helios long-robed Lampetie
came with the news that we had slaughtered his cattle.
Angered at heart, he at once spoke up among the immortals: 'Zeus, Father, and you other blessed gods that are forever, take revenge on the crew of Odysseus, Laërtes' son,
who have wantonly slaughtered the cattle in which I took
such pleasure each time I ascended the starry heaven
and when I turned back down again from heaven to earth. If they don't compensate me fittingly for my cattle,
I shall go down to Hades and spread light among the dead.'
"Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer responded to him, saying:
'Helios, please go on shining among the immortals
and on mortal mankind upon the grain-giving earth!
These men's swift ship I'll soon hit with a bright thunderbolt in the midst of the wine-dark deep and shatter to fragments.'
"This exchange I learned about later from fair-haired Kalypso,
who said she herself had heard it from Hermes the Guide.
"But when I came back down to the ship and the sea,
I rebuked all my men, confronting each one of them in turn; but we found no solution. The cows were already dead.
Now too for my men the gods made a show of portents:
the hides crawled, the meat, both raw and roasted, mooed on the spits, there was a sound like that of lowing cattle.
"For six days now my oh-so-trusty comrades dined
on Helios' best cattle that they'd driven off; but when Zeus son of Kronos brought the seventh day upon us,
then the wind stopped blowing at gale force, and we promptly
boarded our ship and set forth into the wide sea, after first stepping the mast and hoisting the white sail on it.
But once we'd left the island behind, and there was no other land above our horizon, nothing but sky and sea,
then the son of Kronos conjured up a black cloud
over our hollow ship, and the deep beneath it darkened.
She ran on for no long time, since suddenly there came
a screaming west wind, a tempest blowing at full gale force. The blast of that wind snapped the forestays holding the mast,
both of them-back fell the mast, and all its tackle
dropped pell-mell into the bilge; at the stern of the vessel the mast struck the steersman's head, crushing all
the bones of his skull together. He like a diver fell
from the deck, and clear of the bones his proud spirit fled.
Zeus with a clap of thunder hurled his bolt at our vessel:
she shuddered her whole length, struck by the bolt of Zeus,
and was filled with the reek of sulfur. The crew all fell overboard, and like shearwaters went bobbing around our black ship
borne up by the waves. The god deprived them of their return.
But I kept my foothold aboard until the surge tore sides
from keel. The stripped keel the waves now bore off, broke the mast loose at keel level. Attached to the mast
was a backstay fashioned of oxhide. This I seized, and lashed the two together, the keel and the mast.
Riding on these, I let the fierce winds sweep me away.
"But then the tempestuous gale-force west wind ceased, and at once instead came the south wind, cause for alarm, since it would carry me back to murderous Charybdis.
All night long it so bore me, until at sunrise I came
to the headland of Skylle and to dread Charybdis, who now
sucked in the salt seawater; but I reached up
as high as I could, caught hold of the tall fig tree,
and clung to it like a bat. Yet I could in no way manage to get firm foothold or to climb up on it, since
its roots were far distant, its branches high, out of reach,
long, massive, overshadowing Charybdis. So there I clung on persistently, waiting for her to spew back
the mast and keel again. To my delight, back they came, though late-at the hour a man leaves assembly for supper,
one who judges the many disputes of quarrelsome young men,
then it was that those timbers resurfaced out of Charybdis. I let go my handhold and foothold, went plunging down, hit the water ahead of the lengthy spars, and sitting
the ODYSSeY
astride them steered my way onward with both hands.
But Skylle the Father of gods and men did not permit
to see me again, or I'd not have avoided sheer destruction.
"Nine days I was carried from there, and on the tenth night I was brought by the gods to the isle of Ogygia, where
fair-haired Kalypso dwells, dread goddess of human speech,
who befriended and cared for me. But why tell you this story?
I've told it already, just yesterday, here in your house to you and your comely wife. I really dislike repeating
a tale that's been clearly narrated on a previous occasion."


BOOK 13

So he spoke: every one of them sat hushed and silent, enthralled by his words, throughout the shadowy hall. Then Alkinoös once again responded to him, saying: "Odysseus, now you've come to my brazen-floored home
with its high roof, I don't think you'll be driven back here again
on your homeward journey, despite all your misadventures! This I say along with a charge on each man here present- all you who in my halls daily drink up the elders'
tawny-red wine, and sit on here, listening to the singer.
Clothes are laid by for the stranger in a polished chest,
and finely wrought gold, together with all those other gifts that the counselors of the Phaiakians brought here. But come, let's each one of us now present him with a great tripod
and cauldron: we'll recoup the cost by a public collection-
it's hard for one man to spend that much without repayment."
So spoke Alkinoös: what he said was pleasing to them. They now retired to rest, each man to his own house. When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
they went down to the ship with the bronze in which men delight.
Alkinoös, princely in power, himself ranged through the ship,
stowing gifts under the benches, to ensure they would not get in the way of the rowers when they bent to their oars. Then they went to Alkinoös' house and had their dinner.
Alkinoös, princely in power, sacrificed an ox for them
to Zeus of the dark clouds, son of Kronos, lord over all.
After burning the thighs, they sat down to the splendid feast with great enjoyment. Among them a divine bard performed-
Demodokos, highly honored by the people. But Odysseus kept turning his head toward the bright-shining sun,
impatient for it to start setting: he wanted to be gone.
As a man longs for supper, one with whose jointed plow two wine-dark oxen have all day furrowed the field,
and gladly for him does the light of the sun go down
that lets him, weary-kneed, head home for supper-
so welcome to Odysseus was the arrival of sunset.
Then at once he addressed the Phaiakians, lovers of the oar, to Alkinoös above all declaring his mind, in these words: "Alkinoös, lord, most distinguished among all peoples,
pour libations, give me safe escort-and farewell to you all!
Each thing that my heart desired has already been arranged:
conveyance, and gifts of friendship-may the heavenly deities make these turn out well for me! When I get home
may I find my wife truly faithful, my friends all safe and sound!
And may you who remain here give delight to your wedded
wives and children, may the gods grant you excellence
of every sort, may no ills ever come among your people."
So he spoke. They all approved, and endorsed the order
to give the stranger conveyance, since he'd spoken becomingly. Then mighty Alkinoös made a request to his herald, saying:
"Pontonoös, mix us a bowl of wine and serve it to all
in the hall here, so we may pray to Zeus, the Father,
and then give this stranger conveyance to his own country."
So he spoke. Pontonoös mixed the mind-honeying wine and served it to all in turn. They poured libations,
from where they sat, to the blessed gods who hold
broad heaven. Then noble Odysseus stood up, and placed the two-handled cup in Arete's hands,
and addressed her with winged words, saying: "O queen, may you fare well, now and forever, until old age
and death, all mortals' common lot, come on you!
I'm on my way now, and I wish you all joy in this house of your children and people, and of Alkinoös the king."
So spoke noble Odysseus, and stepped out across
the threshold, and mighty Alkinoös sent the herald with him
as his escort, down to the swift ship and the sea,
while Arete sent serving women to accompany him, one bearing a fresh-washed mantle and tunic, another
with orders to carry the close-packed chest, while a third brought the food and the red wine. When they arrived
down by the ship and the sea, then quickly the noble
escorts took over these things and stowed them away
in the hold of the vessel, all the food and drink.
For Odysseus they laid out a linen sheet and a blanket on the hollow ship's deck astern to let him sleep soundly.
He now went aboard himself and lay down, not speaking.
The crew, each in his place, seated themselves at the rowlocks, and cast off the hawser from the hole in the stone post.
They bent to their task then, flung up the brine with their oar blades, and sweet sleep dropped on Odysseus, shuttered his eyelids,
sweet, deep, and sound, most closely akin to death.
The ship-like four yoked stallions on the plain
that all spring forward together under the whip's strokes, and swiftly, high-stepping, gallop upon their way- likewise lifted her stern: in her wake there surged a wave,
vast, dark-hued, of the roaring, many-voiced sea.
Safe and steady she ran-not even a falcon, the hawk that's swiftest of all winged creatures, could fly faster,
so quickly she sheared her way through the waves of the sea, bearing a man whose foresight matched that of the gods,
who in the past had suffered many sorrows at heart
both in men's wars and while braving the cruel sea,
but now slept undisturbed, his sufferings all forgotten.
At the time of that brightest star's rising, which most clearly comes to herald the light of Dawn,early risen, then it was
that the seafaring vessel approached the island. There is
a certain harbor of Phorkys, that Old Man of the Sea,
in the land of Itháke, with two protruding headlands,
each broken off short, and each crouched facing the harbor, which they shield from those heavy waves whipped up outside
by powerful gales, while the well-benched ships lie within
unmoored, once they reach their position for anchorage.
At the head of the harbor there grows a long-leafed olive tree,
and close to this is a cave, very pleasant and well-shaded,
the sacred terrain of those nymphs who are known as Naiads.
Inside it are mixing bowls and two-handled stone jars,
and there too is where the bees deposit their honey.
In the cave there are long stone looms, at which the nymphs weave their webs of sea-purple, a wonder to behold.
Springs, ever-flowing, are there, and the cave has two entrances,
one facing the north wind, accessible to mortals,
but the other, looking southward, is sacred, and men do not use it: it is a pathway for the immortals only.
Here they put in-they knew the place well-and the ship ran half her whole length up the beach, so great was the speed
at which she was driven on by the arms of the rowers.
Then, stepping ashore from the well-benched ship, they first lifted Odysseus out of the hollow ship, together
with the linen sheet and bright blanket, laid him down, just as he was, on the sand, still fast asleep, and unloaded
the goods that the noble Phaiakians had given him, through
great-hearted Athene's prompting, as he set out homeward. These things they left all together by the trunk of the olive tree, away from the path, for fear some other traveler might
come upon them and filch them before Odysseus woke up.
Then they took off back home. However, the Earth-Shaker
did not forget the threats he'd made earlier against godlike Odysseus, and now he questioned Zeus' purpose: "Zeus, Father, no longer among the immortal gods
shall I be honored, when some mortals respect me not at all-
the Phaiakians, even though they share my own ancestry!
For lately I said that Odysseus would have a heap of trouble before he got home-though I did not wholly deprive him of his return: you'd promised that, sworn with your nod!
Yet those men bore him sleeping in their swift ship over the deep,
set him down on Itháke, gave him countless gifts-
bronze, and plentiful gold, and woven garments,
Vividly interrupting the normal flow of epic narrative, they focused the attention of
the hearers on what was coming," Hoekstra points out in Comm., : . In the Odyssey,
beside the present passage, see, e.g.,
more than Odysseus could ever have won from Troy
had he come home unscathed, with his fair share of the spoils."
Then Zeus, the cloud-gatherer, responded to him, saying:
"Well, wide-powered Earth-Shaker, what a speech that was!
The gods do you no dishonor! A harsh business it would be to assail with demeaning slights our oldest and noblest!
But if any mortal, misled by his own forceful power, fails
to honor you, you can always be revenged on him hereafter.
Do as you wish, whatever gives your heart pleasure."
Then Poseidon, Earth-Shaker, responded to him, saying: "I'd act at once, dark-clouded one, in the way you describe,
but I always dread your wrath, and avoid it. Still, now I'd like, as that so-beautiful vessel of the Phaiakians comes
back from its voyage as escort on the misty deep,
to smash it, make them desist, give up this conveyancing
of people! And hide their city with a great encircling mountain.
Then Zeus, the cloud-gatherer, responded to him, saying: "My brother, this, to my mind, seems your best way to act:
When all the folk from the city are watching that ship
as she puts in, then turn her to stone, very close to land,
a stone like the swift ship, so that all mankind may marvel. But don'thide their city with a great encircling mountain."
Now when he heard this, Poseidon, the Earth-Shaker,
went off to Scheria, where the Phaiakians dwell,
and waited there, until that seafaring ship came close inshore, moving fast. Then the Earth-Shaker approached.
He turned her to stone, and rooted her deep below
with one blow from the flat of his hand. Then he was gone.
They exchanged winged words then, one to another, did
the long-oared Phaiakians, men renowned for their ships, and thus would one who'd seen it speak to his neighbor: "Ah me, who was it that fettered our swift ship in the sea on her homeward voyage, when she was in plain sight?"
So would one speak. How it happened they had no idea.
But Alkinoös made them a speech on the subject, saying: "Well now, I do recall certain ancient predictions made by my father: he used to say that Poseidon was angry
with us, because we give safe convoy to all and sundry.
One day, he said, a most beautiful Phaiakian vessel
returning from escort duty out on the misty deep
he'd strike, and hide our city with a great mountain round it. So said the old man, and now this is being fulfilled!
So come, let us all agree to do as I bid: we must cease
to provide conveyance for mortals, whenever a traveler
visits our city; moreover, we must sacrifice to Poseidon
a dozen choice bulls, that he may have compassion for us and not hide our city with a great encircling mountain."
So he spoke. They were terrified, got the bulls ready,
and were all of them busy praying to the lord Poseidon,
all those leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians, standing around the altar, when noble Odysseus awoke from sleep in his native land, yet failed to recognize it,
so long had he been away; for about him the goddess Pallas
Athene, Zeus' daughter, had shed a mist, to make him unrecognizable when she told him what was going on,
and so that neither his wife nor the townsfolk nor his friends would know him until the suitors had paid the full price
for their wrongdoing. Thus everything he saw seemed strange
to their ruler-the unbroken paths, the bays with safe anchorage, the steep rocky cliffs, the flourishing trees. So up he got,
and stood there, gazing round at his own native land. After a moment he groaned, and struck both thighs with the flat of his hands, and sorrowfully exclaimed:
"Alas, to what mortals' country have I come this time?
Are they wild and savage, devoid of notions of justice, or hospitable to strangers, men with god-fearing minds?
Where am I supposed to be taking all this wealth? Where indeed am I wandering to myself ? I should have stayed put there with
the Phaiakians! Then I'd have met some other mighty king
who'd have befriended me, helped me with my homecoming! Now I've no idea where to store this stuff- I can't leave it here,
lest it might become, to my cost, the spoil of others.
Not quite so intelligent or right-thinking, then, I reckon,
were those leaders and counselors of the Phaiakians who
dumped me in some strange country, when indeed they'd said they would bring me to sunny Itháke. They failed to do so.
May Zeus, the protector of suppliants, requite them,
he who watches over mankind, who punishes each wrongdoer!
So I'll count up the items here, examine them well, and see
if they took anything with them in their hollow ship when they left."
That said, he set about counting the surpassingly fine tripods and cauldrons, the gold, the exquisite woven garments.
Of these he found nothing missing. But he mourned for his own land
as he slouched along its shore by the noisy, many-voiced sea,
with much lamentation. Athene now approached him, in the likeness of a young man, a herder of sheep,
one delicately nurtured, as are the sons of princes:
round her shoulders she wore, double-folded, a well-made wrap,
on her sleek feet she had sandals, in her hands a hunting spear.
Odysseus saw her, rejoiced, went up and confronted her,
and addressed her with winged words, saying: "Good friend, since you're the first person I've encountered in this country, greetings, and may it be with no evil intent you meet me!
No, rather rescue these presents, and rescue me, for to you
I pray now as to a god, I come suppliant to your knees. And tell me this truthfully, so that I can be certain of it: What land, what region is this? What people dwell here?
Is it one of the sunny islands, or some promontory, sloping
down to the salty deep from the rich-soiled mainland?"
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "You're an ignoramus, stranger, or you must come from far away to be asking about this country. It's very far from being
as nameless as all that! Indeed, many people know it,
both those who dwell nearer to the dawn and the sun,
and those further behind, out toward the murky darkness. It's rough terrain, not fit for the driving of horses,
Yet not wholly worthless, even if lacking broad plains. Grain grows there abundantly, wine too is a product,
there's always rain and dew to keep it fertile, it's good
pasture for goats and cattle, there's also fine ground cover of every sort, together with all-year watering-places.
Thus, stranger, the name of Itháke has spread even to Troy, which, they say, is far distant from the country of Achaia."
So she spoke. Noble much-enduring Odysseus was glad,
taking joy in the land of his fathers as he heard the words of Pallas Athene, the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus;
and he spoke, addressed her with winged words, yet did not tell her the truth, held back his actual story,
making up as he went a plausible tale in his mind:
"I did hear tell of Itháke, even when in broad Krete,
far away over the deep, and now I myself have come here bringing these goods of mine. I left as much more with my sons, and I'm on the run, after killing a son of Idomeneus-
swift-footed Orsilochos, who in broad Krete surpassed
for fleetness of foot all bread-earning men-because
he meant to deprive me of the plunder I'd won from Troy, (to get which I'd suffered much agony, battling through both the wars of men and the high seas), because I'd refused
to do his father a favor by serving as his henchman
in the land of Troy, while commanding other troops of my own. So I ran him through with my bronze-tipped spear as he came back from the fields. I lay in wait for him at the roadside
with one companion. A dark night obscured the sky:
nobody saw us. Unperceived, I robbed him of life.
But when I'd dispatched him with the sharp bronze, I went at once to the lordly Phoenicians' ship, besought them- giving them plunder enough to satisfy their desire-
to take me on board as a passenger, land me at Pylos,
or noble Elis, where the Epeians hold power.
But gale-force winds forced them away from there, though much against their will: they had no plan to deceive me.
So, beaten off course by weather, we arrived here at night, and quickly rowed into the harbor, nor did any among us
think at all about supper, though we needed it badly,
but just as we were, after landing, we all lay down, and sweet sleep descended upon me in my exhaustion. But they removed all my goods from the hollow ship, and put them close to where I was lying, there on the sand, and then
themselves went aboard and departed for populous Sidon,
while I was left behind here, grieving at heart."
So he spoke.
The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, smiled and stroked him
with one hand, and changed her appearance into the likeness of a tall and beautiful woman, one skilled in fine handiwork,
and spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Sharp and guileful he'd need to be, the man who'd outsmart you
in every trick, were it even a god who met you! Perverse, devious-minded, obsessed with deceit, won't you ever, even in your own country, abandon your deceptions
and the lying tales you adore from the very ground up? But let's speak no more of these things-we're experts both
in craftiness: you are the best of all living mortals
for counsel and storytelling, while I among all the gods
am famed for contrivance and sharpness. You failed to recognize
Zeus' daughter Pallas Athene-I who always stand
at your side, I who guard you in all your tough endeavors- and made sure that you were befriended by all the Phaiakians! Now I have come once more to weave a new plan with you,
to hide all these treasures which the lordly Phaiakians
gave you for your homecoming-by my plan and urging!-
and to tell you all the troubles it's your destiny to endure
in your well-built home. And endure them you must, not reveal to anyone, man or woman, that in fact it's you,
come back from your wanderings, but silently endure
a host of indignities, submit to men's violent acts."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"It's hard for a mortal, goddess, to recognize you on meeting, however clever he is: you can assume any likeness!
But this I know well, you were kindly disposed toward me
back when we sons of Achaians were fighting at Troy.
But after we'd sacked the steep citadel of Priam,
and left in our ships, and some god then scattered the Achaians, never since then, Zeus' daughter, have I seen you, or observed you boarding my ship, to ward off some trouble from me!
It was indeed burdened with a torn heart in my breast
that I kept wandering on, until the gods rescued me
from my troubles-until, indeed, in the Phaiakians' rich land
you cheered me with your words, yourself led me to their city!
Now in your father's name I entreat you-for I don't
think it's to sunny Itháke I've come, but some other
country I find myself in, and that this assertion of yours
was spoken in mockery, to deceive my mind-please tell me whether in fact or not it's my native land I've come to."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"You always have some such idea in your head! That's why
I cannot abandon you in your unhappiness. Besides, you're courteous, sharp-witted, discreet. Any other man would gladly, on getting back after his wanderings,
have hurried home to see his wife and children; but you
aren't willing to ascertain anything or to make enquiries
until you've made trial of your wife, who, now as always, sits in your halls, while for her the long nights and days waste away slowly in sorrow with the tears she sheds.
But this I never doubted, and in my heart knew well-
that you'd make it home after losing all your comrades.
Still, I wasn't ready to quarrel on your behalf with Poseidon, my father's brother, who nursed a grudge in his heart against you, enraged because you blinded his dear son.
But come now, I'll show you the realm of Itháke, convince you!
This is the harbor of Phorkys, the Old Man of the Sea,
and here, at the head of the harbor, is the long-leafed olive tree, and close to it the cave, very pleasant and well-shaded,
the sacred terrain of those nymphs who are known as Naiads.
This is the high-roofed cave where you used to honor
those nymphs with so many rich sacrifices; and yonder
forest-clad mountain is Neriton."
That said, the goddess dispersed the mist, and the landscape stood out clearly. Then glad indeed was long-suffering noble Odysseus,
and rejoiced in his country, and kissed the grain-giving earth,
and at once, raising up his hands, made a prayer to the nymphs:
"You Naiad nymphs, Zeus' daughters, never once did I think that I'd see you again! But now with friendly prayers I greet you-and gifts I shall give you, as I used to do, should Zeus' daughter, leader of hosts, be willing to let me
live on myself, and to bring my own dear son to manhood."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene responded to him, saying: "Be confident, don't let these matters bother your mind! And now let's store your goods right away in the furthest recess
of the sacred cave, where they'll always be safe for you, and ourselves plan how all may turn out for the best."
So saying,
the goddess made her way into the shadowy cave, searching through it for hiding places, while Odysseus
brought all his treasures inside-the gold, the unworn bronze, and the finely made clothing that the Phaiakians gave him.
These things he stowed well away, and Pallas Athene,
daughter of Zeus of the aegis, set a stone at the entrance. Then they both sat down by the trunk of the sacred olive,
and discussed how to wreak destruction on the arrogant suitors. The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, began the discussion, saying:
"Scion of Zeus, Laërtes' son, resourceful Odysseus,
take thought how to lay hands on these shameless suitors who for three years now have been lording it in your halls- courting your godlike wife, pressing wooers' gifts upon her, while she, heart yearning sadly for your return, gives hope
to all, making promises to every last man of them,
and sending them messages. But her mind is on other things."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"Indeed, I was like to have met the same evil fate in my halls as did Agamemnon, son of Atreus,
had you not told me, goddess, the whole truth of the matter!
So come now, weave me a scheme of revenge upon these men, and yourself stand by my side, fill me with strength
and daring, as when we undid the bright diadem of Troy! Were you, grey-eyed goddess, beside me, hot to fight,
I'd take on, with you, three hundred warriors, O my sovereign goddess, given your free and ready support."
The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying: "Assuredly I shall stand by you: you will not go unnoticed when we are about this business: your broad floor, I think,
will be splashed with the blood and brains of more than one of those suitors who are now devouring your livelihood!
First, let me make you unrecognizable to any mortal:
I'll shrivel the healthy flesh on your supple limbs,
destroy the fair hair on your head,wrap you in rags so foul
as to make the mere sight of a man who's clad in them disgusting;
and I'll dim your eyes, that before were so attractive, to make you look really shabby to all these suitors-
and to your wife, and the son you left behind in your halls. Now what you must do first of all is seek out the swineherd-
he looks after your pigs, but also is well disposed toward you,
and loves your son, and discreet Penelope. Him you'll find stationed along with his pigs. These are out at pasture close to the Raven's Rock and the spring of Arethousa,
feeding on plentiful acorns and drinking dark spring water,
those things that nourish the abundant fat of swine.
Stay there, and sitting by him, ask all your questions. I meanwhile shall go to Sparta, land of fair women,
and summon Telemachos-your dear son, Odysseus- who went to broad Lakedaimon to visit Menelaös
and enquire about you, find out if you were still alive."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"Why didn't you tell him, you whose mind is all-knowing?
Was it so he too might suffer hardships traversing
the unharvested sea, while others devour his livelihood?"
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Don't let him be too heavy a weight upon your mind! It was I who directed him, so he'd get a good reputation by going there! He's suffered no hardship, he's relaxing in the house of Atreus' son, enjoys his limitless bounty.
There are young men lying in wait for him in their black ship,
eager to kill him before he gets back to his native land;
but I don't see it happening. Before that the earth will cover one or more of the suitors now devouring your livelihood."
So saying, Athene began touching him with her wand.
She shriveled the healthy flesh on his supple limbs,
destroyed the fair hair on his head, and over his whole person now stretched the skin of an old and age-worn man. She dimmed his eyes, that before were so attractive,
and changed his clothes to a ragged cloak and tunic,
all threadbare and filthy, begrimed with foul black smoke;
and round him she cast the great hide of a speedy deer, bald of its hair, and gave him a staff, and a leather bag tattered and rent, that was held by a twisted cord.
Plans made, the two of them parted. The goddess now left for lordly Lakedaimon, in search of Odysseus' son.


BOOK 14

But the rough path up from the harbor was that which Odysseus now took, by the woodland and heights, to where Athene
said he'd find the noble swineherd, who, of all the household Odysseus possessed, devoted most care to his property.
Ensconced in his forecourt he found him, where the enclosure
had been built up high, at a point with a wide view round, a fine big open courtyard, in a sheltered position. This
the swineherd had built himself, unknown to his mistress or old Laërtes, for the pigs of his absent master, using
quarried stones, topped off with a coping of prickly thorn.
Outside he'd driven in posts, right round in a circle,
strong and close, splitting them off from an oak's dark center; inside the enclosure he'd fashioned a dozen sties
set close to each other, to serve as beds for the pigs:
in each of them fifty ground-sleeping swine were penned.
These were sows, for breeding; the boars bedded down outside,
and were fewer by far in number, for the godlike suitors made inroads on them for feasting. The swineherd always sent them the best of the fattened hogs: there were
three hundred and sixty of these, and there slept beside them
four guard dogs, as savage as wild beasts, specially reared by the swineherd, leader of men. He himself was now busy making a pair of sandals and fitting them to his feet, cutting a piece of fresh-colored oxhide. The others
had gone off, one here, one there, with their droves of swine-
three of them, that is: the fourth he'd sent into town
with a hog, taken under constraint, to the arrogant suitors, for them to slaughter and glut their appetites with the meat.
Odysseus was suddenly spotted by the ferocious guard dogs,
and they made for him, barking loudly. Odysseus, however,
showing presence of mind, sat down, letting go of his staff. Yet there on his own farmstead he might have been badly hurt had the swineherd not run up quickly, chasing the dogs
across the forecourt, dropping his oxhide as he came,
and, shouting loudly, had scattered them this way and that
with volleys of stones. He then addressed his master, saying: "Old man, those dogs came so close to tearing you apart
in an instant, and you would have put the blame on me! And the gods have brought on me other griefs and sorrows:
For I sit here lamenting, and mourning a godlike master
and fattening up these hogs for other men to devour,
while he may now be adrift, half-starved and in need of food, in some town or country of aliens, foreign of speech-
that is, if he's still alive, and enjoying the sunlight!
But come indoors with me now, old man, and after
you've quietened your heart with food and wine, you too
can relate where you're from, all the hardships you've endured."
So saying, the nobleswineherd escorted him to his hut, ushered him in, heaped up thick rough brushwood, and on it
spread the hide of a shaggy wild goat for him to sit on-
his own coverlet, large and hairy-and Odysseus was pleased
at being given such a good welcome, and addressed him, saying: "My host,may Zeus and the other immortal gods now grant you what you most desire, since you gave me a ready welcome."
To him then, swineherd Eumaios, did you make answer, saying:
"Stranger, were one even meaner than you to come here,
I'd still have no right to reject him, for all strangers and beggars are from Zeus, and a gift, however small, is friendly
from folk such as us; for that's always the lot of servants,
frightened when those who have the mastery over them
are the young. The gods, it's true, have blocked that man's return who'd have treated me as a friend, would have given me possessions- a home, a plot of land, a much-courted wife, such things
as a kind-hearted master gives to a servant of his
who works hard for him, whose labor a god makes prosper
just as this work prospers to which I'm now committed.
For me my lord would have done much, had he grown old here; but he perished, as I now wish Helen's whole line had perished, utterly, she who unstrung the knees of so many men!
For he too went out there to save Agamemnon's honor,
to Ilion, rich in good horses, to fight against the Trojans."
So saying, he quickly girded his tunic with a belt,
and went out to the sties, where the droves of pigs were confined. From there he chose two, brought them in, and killed them both,
singed them and cut them up and put the meat on spits,
and roasted it. Then he placed the cuts, hot and still spitted, with a sprinkling of white barley, in front of Odysseus.
In an ivy-wood bowl he now mixed the honey-sweet wine, and sat down facing his guest, and addressed him invitingly:
"Eat now, stranger! Enjoy the food that's the fare for servants-
cheap pork! The fattened hogs are kept for the suitors' meals, men whose minds care nothing for the gods' wrath, or for pity.
The blessed gods do not favor reckless deeds, but rather have rewards for justice and for men's righteous deeds.
Even the hostile and lawless, who invade the land of others
to get a living, and Zeus allows them their plunder, so that they sail home with laden vessels-on their minds too falls the strong fear of the gods' wrath. But these men here
must know something, must have had some word from a god
about his sorry death, since they will not court properly
or go back to their own possessions, but here at their ease
waste our goods wantonly, and restraint there is none,
for on every night and day that we get from Zeus they never sacrifice just one victim, or even two, I think,
and our wine they waste, consuming it recklessly.
Great indeed, past telling, were his resources: no other
heroic warrior, either away on the dark mainland,
or on Itháke itself, could match them. Not twenty men together had as much wealth: I'll list you the sum of it.
On the mainland, twelve herds of cattle, twelve flocks of sheep,
as many droves of swine and wide-ranging troops of goats are pastured alike by outsiders and his own herdsmen.
Eleven wide-ranging troops of goats browse at the farthest
end of the island, and over them good men watch,
each of whom daily drives off one of his troop for them-
whichever fattened goat looks to be the best that he has. Myself, I guard and watch over these swine here, and choose the best of the hogs to provide for them."
So he spoke.
His grateful guest was already downing the meat and wine
greedily, in silence, planning trouble for the suitors.
But when he'd had supper, and quietened his heart by eating, the swineherd topped up with wine the bowl from which
he himself drank, and gave it him; he took it, glad at heart,
and spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Friend,
who was the man that bought you with his resources,
one as wealthy and powerful as you mentioned? You say he perished upholding the honor of Agamemnon: tell me, since such a person I may perhaps recognize;
for only Zeus and the other immortal gods may know
whether I've seen and had news of him: much I've wandered."
The swineherd, leader of men, responded to him, saying: "Old man, no wanderer who turned up with news of him would ever convince his wife and son: far from it!
Vagrant fellows in need of comfort and sustenance
tell lies: they have no desire to offer a true account!
Anyone who in his wandering stops off at Itháke
goes straight to my mistress and spins her a lying yarn; and she entertains him kindly and questions him in detail, while shedding tears of sorrow from beneath her eyelids,
as a woman will do when her husband has perished far away.
You too, old man, would be quick to concoct a story If someone gave you for it a cloak and tunic to wear!
As for him, by now the dogs and swift birds of prey
will have torn the skin from his bones, and the soul's gone from him,
or fish in the deep sea have eaten him, and his bones
are now down under the sands of some mainland beach. So he's perished out there, and on his friends hereafter-
all, but on me most of all-grief 's been laid, for never again will I find so kindly a master, however far I go,
not even if I went back to my parents' home, the place
where I was born, and they raised me themselves. Yet it's not
so much for them that I grieve-much though I now long to set eyes on them again, to be in my own country-
no, it's Odysseus for whom I yearn, and he's gone!
To speak his name, stranger, even when he's absent, I find
presumptuous,since he always loved and cared for me greatly: 'Honored master' I rather call him, even though he's far away."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Friend, since yours is a total denial, since you don't believe
that man will ever come back, and your heart's still incredulous,
then I'll not just make a plain statement, but swear an oath to it that Odysseus will return! I claim the reward for good news
the moment that man sets foot inside his home-then clothe me in a cloak and a tunic, fine garments! But until then,
however sore my need, I would not accept anything;
for as hateful to me as the gates of Hades is the man who, yielding to poverty, concocts a deceitful story.
Zeus, first among gods, be my witness, and this guest's table, and the hearth of peerless Odysseus, to which I have come,
that all these things indeed will come to pass as I tell you!
Within the current moon's sequence Odysseus will arrive here, between this month's waning and the rising of the next.
He will come back home, and take vengeance on all those here who dishonor his wife and his illustrious son."
To him then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"Neither shall I pay you this reward for good news, old man, nor will Odysseus ever come home, so relax and drink,
and let's think about other matters-don't remind me of these!
The heart in my breast suffers agonies whenever
anyone mentions my caring master. As for your oath,
we'll let that ride: may Odysseus indeed come back, as I hope and desire, as indeed does Penelope too, and aged Laërtes, and godlike Telemachos. Now
it's for him I ceaselessly grieve, the son Odysseus begot:
Telemachos. Him the gods bred up like a sapling: I thought
he'd grow to be no worse a man among men
than his own dear father, a marvel in form and looks.
But some immortal damaged the common sense within him, or maybe some human: he went after news of his father
to sacred Pylos, and now the lordly suitors are lying
in wait for him on his way home, that Arkeisios' godlike line may die out on Itháke, leave no name behind.
But we'll leave him be now, whether he's to be ambushed or escape with a helping hand from the son of Kronos.
Come now, old sir, inform me about your own misfortunes,
and make it a truthful account, one that I can rely on!
Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents? What kind of ship did you come on? And how did sailors bring you here to Itháke? And who did they claim to be?
For I don't imagine you made your way here on foot."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Very well, I'll give you a truthful account of these matters.
I only wish that we two had enough supplies of food and sweet wine, here in your hut, enough to last a while,
that we could feast on in silence, while others did the work: easily then could I take up the space of a whole year
and still not have finished the tale of my heartfelt sufferings- sum total of all that by the gods' will I've endured.
"From broad Krete, I claim, derives my family background:
I'm the son of a wealthy man, and numerous other
offspring were born and raised in his halls, legitimate
sons of his wife; but the mother who bore me was bought, a concubine. Yet he honored me like his true-born sons, did Kastor, the son of Hylax, from whom I claim descent,
and who was revered like a god by the Kretans in their land
for his wealth and prosperity, his splendid sons. But still the spirits of death pounced on him and carried him off
to the house of Hades. His property was divided by his arrogant sons, who cast lots for it. But to me
they allotted a small portion only, house and all.
Yet I married a wife from a wealthy landowning family
on the grounds of my excellence: I was no good-for-nothing, no coward in battle. Now all that strength is gone,
though I think when you look at the stubble you'll recognize
what the grain once was. Since then I've suffered greatly.
In the past Athene and Ares endowed me with courage
and rank-breaking strength: whenever I chose for an ambush our best men, sowing the seeds of trouble for the foe,
never did my proud spirit anticipate death: no, I
was always the first to spring forward, and with my spear
to lay low any opponent who lacked my speed of foot.
Such a man was I in warfare. Field work was not to my taste, nor was running a household-the way to raise fine children. Oared vessels were always my passion-that, and warfare,
arrows and well-polished javelins-deadly objects,
to which others, more often than not, react with a shudder; but to me were welcome: maybe a god endeared them to me, and different men take pleasure in different actions.
For before the Achaians' sons set foot in the land of Troy
I had nine times commanded troops and swift-sailing ships
against foreign fighters. Much plunder kept coming my way, of which I chose what I fancied, and plenty afterwards
I obtained by lot. At once my house grew rich: thenceforward I became respected and feared among the Kretans.
"But when
far-seeing Zeus devised that hateful expedition
which unstrung the knees of so many warriors, then they ordered me, together with far-famed Idomeneus, to lead ships to Ilion, nor was there any device
that would let us refuse, for the people's stern will compelled us.
There for nine years we Achaians' sons were at war,
but on the tenth we sacked Priam's citadel, and set out
for home in our ships. A god then scattered the Achaians,
and for wretched me Zeus the planner thought up more trouble.
One month I stayed home, taking pleasure in my children
and wedded wife and possessions. But after that
to Egypt my spirit drove me to make a voyage,
in ships that were well appointed, with my godlike comrades. Nine ships I fitted out, and their crews assembled quickly.
For six days on end my trusty comrades feasted,
and I provided them with victims in plenty, so they
could sacrifice to the gods and have a feast themselves;
then on the seventh we boarded, sailed out from broad Krete, running on before a strong wind out of the north,
lightly, as though downstream: nor did any misfortune
befall my vessels: unscathed and free from sickness
we sat there, while the wind and the helmsmen steered them.
"On the fifth day we reached Egypt's fine-flowing stream and in that Egyptian river I anchored my curved vessels.
Then I issued orders to my trusty comrades, to remain
there with the ships, and to be those ships' protectors
while I sent off scouts to find and man lookout posts.
But, trusting their strength, they yielded to wanton aggression, and at once began ravaging the Egyptians' splendid
fields, and carrying off their wives and little children,
and killing the men. Word quickly reached the city,
and, hearing the shouting, people came out at daybreak.
The whole plain filled up with infantry and horses
and the bright glint of bronze. Zeus, hurler of thunderbolts, cast a craven panic upon my comrades: nobody dared
to stand firm and face the foe, for trouble confronted us
on every side. Many of us they slew with the sharp bronze; others they led off alive, to do forced labor for them.
But Zeus himself put this thought in my mind-how I wished I had suffered death and encountered my destiny there
In Egypt, since yet more sorrow was waiting to welcome me!
At once I removed from my head the well-wrought helmet, and the shield from my shoulders, and let fall my spear, and made my way toward the horses of the king,
and clasped his knees and kissed them. He rescued and pitied me,
picked me up in his chariot, took me, weeping, to his home.
Numerous fighters ran at me with their ash-wood spears, eager to kill me, for they were greatly angered;
but he warded them off, in concern for the wrath of Zeus, the strangers' protector, the stern requiter of evil deeds.
"I stayed there for seven years, during which I acquired
great wealth from the men of Egypt, for they all gave me gifts. But when the eighth year came round for me, there appeared a man, a Phoenician, a fine expert in deceptions,
a sharp nibbler, who already had cheated many people.
By his cunning he talked me into accompanying him to Phoenicia, where were located his home and his possessions,
and there I stayed with him till a year had run its course. But when at length the months and days were completed Of the circling year, and the seasons in turn came on,
he put me aboard a seagoing ship bound for Libya, with a lying tale that we'd both be conveying a cargo,
but in fact to sell me there for a high price. I went with him on the ship, though suspecting trouble, under constraint. She ran on before a strong wind out of the north,
above central Krete; but Zeus was planning their destruction,
and when we'd left Krete behind us, and there was no other land in plain view, but nothing save sky and sea,
then the son of Kronos conjured up a black cloud
over our hollow ship, and the deep beneath it darkened.
Zeus with a clap of thunder hurled his bolt at our vessel:
she shuddered her whole length, struck by the bolt of Zeus,
and was filled with the reek of sulfur. The crew all fell overboard, and like shearwaters went bobbing around our black ship,
borne up by the waves. The god deprived them of their return.
But for me, in my heartfelt distress, Zeus himself at this moment
put into my hands the sea-going vessel's great mast,
so that once more I might escape destruction. And so, clinging firmly to this, I was carried away by fierce winds for nine days, but on the tenth, in the blackness of night,
a great wave rolled me ashore in Thesprotian country.
There the Thesprotian king, the hero Pheidon,
cared for me without payment, for his son now found me overcome by chill air and exhaustion, and took me home, leading me by the hand, till he reached his father's abode,
and gave me clothing, a mantle and tunic. It was there
that I heard news of Odysseus, for the king now told me
he'd befriended and entertained him on his way to his native land, and showed me all the possessions Odysseus had amassed-
bronze and gold, and iron, laboriously wrought,
enough to support his descendants to the tenth generation,
so great was the wealth stored for him there in the king's domain. But Odysseus, he said, had gone to Dodone, to discover,
from the deep-leaved sacred oak, what Zeus was planning, and how he should make his way back to Itháke's rich land
after so long an absence, whether openly or in secret.
And he swore to me at home, while pouring libations,
that the ship had been launched, and the crew were in readiness to convey him to his own country. But me he sent off first, since there chanced to be a Thesprotian vessel ready
to set sail for Doulichion, that country rich in wheat.
He told them to ferry me there, to King Akastos, with proper care; but an evil plan had found favor in their hearts
about me, so I'd still suffer at misery's nadir. When
the seagoing vessel had sailed a fair way from land, at once
they set about making ready the day of slavery for me.
My clothing, my mantle and tunic, they stripped off from me, and replaced them with the vile rags and tattered tunic
that you can see now in front of you. That same evening they reached the tilled fields of sunny Itháke. Then
they left me bound fast in the well-benched ship with a rope
that they'd twisted tight, and themselves went off ashore, and hastened to take their supper there on the seashore. But the gods themselves took care of me, untied the knots easily. Wrapping the rags around my head, I slid down
the polished gangplank, plunged breast first into the sea,
struck out with both arms, swimming fast, and very quickly got back ashore, well away from where they were.
Then I went up and found a coppice in full bloom,
and lay cowering there, while they, complaining loudly,
went searching around; but when it seemed quite hopeless
to go on looking, they went back and reembarked
on their hollow ship. The gods themselves kept me hidden easily, then brought me safe here to the farmstead
of an understanding man. So, it's still my fate to live."
To him then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"Ah, wretched stranger, indeed you stirred my heart deeply
with your detailed tale of how much you suffered and wandered!
But one part was not, I think, right, nor will you convince me- what you said of Odysseus. Why should a man such as you
tell a pointless lie? Apropos my lord's homecoming,
this I know well: he got himself so hated by all the gods that they would not allow his life to end among the Trojans or in the arms of his friends, after winding up the war.
Then all the Achaians would have raised him a burial mound,
and great glory would have been his, and his son's, hereafter.
But now, ingloriously, the storm winds have swept him away. I stay out here with the pigs, I don't go into town,
except those times when prudent Penelope wants me,
when news has reached her from somewhere or other-then
folk sit round and keep querying every detail,
both those who grieve for their lord who's been so long gone, and those who enjoy eating up his livelihood for free.
But I haven't fancied this business of questioning and enquiries ever since a certain Aitolian deceived me with his story.
He was someone who'd killed a man: after wandering far
he appeared at my house, and I gave him a friendly welcome. He'd seen him, he said, with the Kretans in Idomeneus' company, repairing his ships, severely battered by storms. He assured me Odysseus would be back here by summer or harvesttime,
bringing much treasure, both he and his godlike comrades!
And you, grief-struck old man, since some god led you to me, don't try to please me with lies, or to charm me in any way: That's not why I shall respect and befriend you, but through fear of Zeus, god of strangers, and because I feel pity for you."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "The spirit you have in your breast is indeed distrustful,
one not to be won or persuaded even by my sworn oath! Come, then, let's make an agreement, to which hereafter the gods who hold Olympos can bear witness for us both:
If your master does in fact return to this house of his, then give me a mantle and tunic to wear, and send me
on to Doulichion, which is where my heart's set on going; but if your master does not come back home-as I tell you he will-set your servants on me, have me thrown off a high
cliff,
as a warning to other beggars against telling lying tales."
Then the noble swineherd responded to him, saying:
"Stranger, that way I'd win a fine reputation for virtue among men, both today and in time to come, were I, who brought you into my hut and entertained you,
then to kill you, deprive you of the dear breath of life!
Very ready I'd be then to pray to Kronos' son Zeus!
But now it's time for supper. My comrades should very soon be home, so we can make a tasty meal in the hut."
While the two thus conversed, the one with the other, the pigs
and the men who were herding them now drew near. The sows
they shut up for the night in their accustomed sties,
and a vast clamor arose from the pigs as they were penned. Then the noble swineherd called to his comrades, saying: ''Fetch out the best of the hogs, so I can slaughter it
for the stranger-he's traveled far-and we'll share it too,
who have all the trouble of tending these white-tusked swine while others devour our labor and pay nothing for it."
So saying, he split up wood with the pitiless bronze, while the others brought in a five-year-old fattened hog
and set him down by the hearth. Nor did the swineherd
forget the immortals now, for his was a virtuous mind.
He cut off and cast in the fire as firstlings hairs from the head of the white-tusked hog, with prayers to all the gods
that quick-witted Odysseus might return to his own home.
Then he lifted a billet of oak he'd kept from the splitting
and felled the hog. It died. They cut its throat and singed it, then butchered it at once. The swineherd took cuts of raw flesh from all its limbs as firstlings, wrapped them in rich fat,
gave them a sprinkling of barley, then threw them in the fire.
The rest they cut up, and threaded the pieces on spits,
and roasted them carefully, then drew all the pieces off and heaped them on platters. The swineherd now stood up to carve, an expert in fair sharing. The meat he sliced into seven portions: one he set aside
for the nymphs and for Hermes, son of Maia, together
with an accompanying prayer. Of the rest, each man got one. But Odysseus he honored with the long cuts from the chine of the white-tusked hog, and gladdened his master's heart.
Resourceful Odysseus now addressed him, saying: "Eumaios,
I only wish you could be as dear to Zeus the Father
as to me, a poor man, whom you honor with such good things."
To him, then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying: "Eat, my strange guest, and enjoy what's offered here,
such as it is. A god will give one thing, but let another go,
just as the whim takes him. He can do anything ."
So he spoke, and offered the firstlings to the gods that are forever, poured bright wine in libation, then put the cup in the hands
of Odysseus, sacker of cities, and sat down by his portion.
Bread was served to them by Mesaulios, whom the swineherd
had acquired by himself, during his master's absence,
unknown to his mistress and to the aged Laërtes, purchasing him from the Taphians with his own resources.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them. But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
Mesaulios took off the bread, and they hastened to retire,
filled to repletion with all the bread and meat they'd eaten.
Now night came on-bad weather, the dark of the moon. Zeus rained the whole night through. A strong wet west wind kept blowing.
Then Odysseus spoke among them, making trial of the swineherd:
would he strip off his own cloak and give it him, or tell
one of his comrades to do so, since he cared for him so much? ''Hear me out now, Eumaios, and you, all his other comrades, while I tell you a boastful story. It's the wine that's urging me- mind-crazing stuff, that sets on even the quick-witted
to singing and gentle laughter, drives him to get up and dance,
or to make some remark better left unspoken. However, now that I've opened up, I won't keep quiet about it.
I wish I was young again and my strength still undiminished,
like the time we prepared an ambush, and led it beneath Troy's walls. The leaders were Odysseus and Atreus' son Menelaös,
and I was the third in command, at their own invitation. When we came up under the city and its sheer wall, around the outskirts, in the thick brushwood, among the reeds and marshes, crouching down under our arms
we lay. A bad night came on when the north wind dropped.
It grew chilly. Snow descended on us like hoar frost, freezing cold. Ice crystals formed upon our shields.
Now all the rest were equipped with cloaks and tunics
and slept in peace, their shields pulled over their shoulders,
but when I set out I'd left my cloak behind with my comrades-
thoughtlessly, not supposing I'd ever get so cold,
so I'd come with only my shield and my shining waist-guard. But in the third watch of the night, when the stars had turned, then I spoke to Odysseus, who was lying close beside me, nudging him with my elbow. He gave ear at once.
'Scion of Zeus, Laërtes' son, resourceful Odysseus,
I shan't be among the living much longer, this wintry cold is killing me, I've no cloak, some god beguiled me
into wearing a tunic only: there's no way out for me now.'
"So I spoke, and he then thought up the following scheme- such a man he was both for planning and for fighting!- and speaking in a low voice he addressed me, saying:
'Quiet now, in case some other Achaian might overhear you.'
With that, head propped on his bent arm,he made a speech: 'Listen, friends: a god-sent dream came to me while I slept.
We've come too far from the ships. Is there someone who'd go and ask Atreus' son Agamemnon, his people's shepherd, could he send us more of the troops from beside the ships?'
"So he spoke, and there stood up Thoas, Andraimon's son, with alacrity, laid aside his purple cloak, and set off,
running, back to the ships. I lay down in his clothing
gladly. Then Dawn, golden-throned, appeared. Would that
I were young now, as then I was, my strength still unimpaired- then would one of the hands in the farmstead lend me a cloak,
both from kindness and out of respect for a decent man.
But as it is they despise me for the rags I'm wearing."
To him, swineherd Eumaios, you then responded, saying: "Old man, this tale you recounted was faultless: in it nothing you said was unfitting or profitless. Hence
you'll not go short of clothing nor of anything else
that befits a long-suffering suppliant on arrival- for now: but at first light you'll go back to your rags,
since here there aren't many cloaks or changes of tunic to put on: no more than one for each man. But when
Odysseus' dear son returns, you can look to him
for clothing to wear, a cloak and a tunic too,
and he'll send you wherever your heart and mind desire."
So saying, up he got, and made up close to the fire a bed, throwing on it the skins of sheep and goats,
and Odysseus lay down there, and over him he spread
a big thick cloak he kept by him to change into whenever a really bad winter storm arose.
So there Odysseus slept, and alongside him slept too the four young men. But the swineherd himself was not
content to bed down there, to sleep away from the hogs,
and made ready to go outside. Odysseus was glad that he took such care of his absent lord's property.
First he slung a sharp sword from his sturdy shoulders, then donned a very thick cloak to keep the wind out,
and over this draped the fleece of a well-fed goat,
and took a sharp hunting-spear as defense against dogs or men, and went out to get some rest where the white-tusked hogs slept, under a hollow rock, out of reach of the north wind.


BOOK 15

Now Pallas Athene was gone to spacious Lakedaimon, to remind Odysseus' great-hearted, illustrious son about his return journey, to speed up his homecoming.
She found Telemachos and Nestor's splendid son
bedded down in the forecourt of glorious Menelaös.
Now Nestor's son was still overmastered by gentle sleep,
but sweet sleep had not taken Telemachos: worry about his father had kept him wakeful throughout the ambrosial night.
Now grey-eyed Athene approached and addressed him, saying:
"It's not a good thing, Telemachos, this straying far from home,
neglecting your possessions, the overweening men infesting your house, the risk they may share and consume all your goods, while you're gone on this useless journey!
You must urge Menelaös, good at the war cry, at once
to send you back, if you want to find your blameless mother
at home still: already her father and brothers are at her to marry Eurymachos-as a gift giver he outdoes
all the other suitors, is ratcheting up the bride-price!
And make sure she takes no item from the house without your consent- for you know the kind of thinking that lurks in a woman's breast:
she wants to increase the estate of the man who marries her, but of former children and previous wedded spouse
she takes no thought once he's dead, no longer asks after him.
No, you must go yourself, and entrust all your property
to whichever one of your maidservants seems most reliable
until the gods name to you your own noble bride-to-be. And another thing I will tell you, and you take it to heart: The best of the suitors are lying in wait for you, with intent, in the strait between Itháke and rugged Same, determined
to kill you before you get back to your native land.
But I don't see it happening. Before that, the earth will cover some one of the suitors now devouring your livelihood.
Still, keep your well-built ship far distant from the islands, and sail by night: you'll get a good tailwind from that
one immortal it is who guards and protects you. But when
you make landfall at the nearest shore of Itháke then, send on the ship with all your comrades to the city;
you yourself, though, must first seek out the swineherd- he looks after your pigs, and also is well disposed
toward you. Spend the night there, and tell him to go into town
with a message for prudent Penelope: that you're unharmed, and that you've made it back home successfully from Pylos."
This said, she went on her way to lofty Olympos.
Telemachos then awoke Nestor's son from his sweet sleep
with a kick of the foot,saying: "Rise and shine now,
Peisistratos, Nestor's son! Bring out your whole-hooved horses, harness them up to the chariot! We need to get going."
Peisistratos, son of Nestor, responded to him, saying: "Telemachos, however much we want to be on the road
no way can we drive through the dark night! It'll soon be dawn.
So wait until Menelaös-Atreus' hero son, famed spearman- brings out his gifts and stows them aboard the chariot,
and sends us on our way with affectionate good wishes; for a guest remembers with gratitude all his days
the man who was his host, who showed him kindness."
So he spoke, and promptly golden-throned Dawn arrived. Menelaös, good at the war cry, came out to them then,
getting up from the bed that he shared with fair-tressed Helen, and when Odysseus' son, the hero, caught sight of him, he
hurriedly clothed himself in his shining tunic, and flung
a great cloak over his sturdy shoulders, and went out
and approached Menelaös and stood before him and said: [did Telemachos, the dear son of godlike Odysseus, saying:]"Atreus' son Menelaös, Zeus' scion, leader of hosts,
send me back right away to my own dear country,
for already my heart is impatient for the homeward journey."
Menelaös, good at the war cry, then responded to him, saying: "Telemachos, I'll not press you to stay here overlong
when you want to go home: indeed, I'd blame any other man
who, as host, behaved in an overfriendly manner
as I would the downright unfriendly! Moderation in all things is best. It's just as wrong to urge a guest's departure
against his will as to keep him when he's itching to be off.
Treat your guest well while he's there, let him go when he wants.
Just wait, though, until I bring your presents, and stow them-
fine ones-aboard your chariot, for you to see, while I tell the women to get dinner ready from the rich store within. For there's prestige and glory as well as profit when those off to travel this boundless earth eat a square meal first.
And if you'd like a detour through Hellas and mid-Argos,
I'd be happy to come along with you, I'll harness up horses and be your guide round the cities-no one will pass us on empty-handed, they'll give us something to take with us,
a fine bronze tripod, perhaps, or maybe a cauldron,
or a team of two mules, or a golden drinking cup."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"Atreus' son Menelaös, Zeus' scion, leader of hosts,
I want to go back to our place now: when I came here I left no one to act as guardian over my possessions.
In seeking my godlike father I fear I may perish myself,
or some article of great value go missing from my halls."
When he heard this, at once Menelaös, good at the war cry, gave instructions both to his wife and to her handmaids
to make ready a meal in the hall from the rich store within.
Eteoneus son of Boethoös,now approached him,
having just got up-he lived very close nearby-
and him Menelaös, good at the war cry, asked
to light a fire, and to roast some meat: he heard and did not disobey. Menelaös now went to his fragrant storeroom,
not alone, but together with Helen and Megapenthes.
When they came to where their valuables were stored the son of Atreus chose a two-handled cup, and told
his son Megapenthes to carry a mixing bowl, made of silver, while Helen went and stood by the clothing-chests, where lay
the embroidered robes that she herself had fashioned.
One of these Helen, bright among women, chose
and lifted out-the largest, the most exquisitely embroidered, that shone like a star and lay underneath all the rest.
They went on out from the house till they met Telemachos,
And fair-haired Menelaös then addressed him, saying:
"Telemachos, may the return that your heart so much desires be brought to pass by Zeus, Here's loud-thundering spouse! And of all the gifts that are stored away in my house
I'll give you the one that's most beautiful and most precious-
a finely wrought mixing bowl, one fashioned all of silver
except for its rim, that's finished off in gold,
the work of Hephaistos, a gift from the hero Phaidimos,
the Sidonians' king, at the time that his house gave me shelter on my way home by that route. Now I'd like to give it to you."
So saying, Atreus' son, the hero, placed in his hands
the two-handled cup, and strong Megapenthes brought the shining mixing bowl, all silver, set it before him; while fair-cheeked Helen came up to him, carrying
the robe in her hands, and now addressed him, saying:
"I too, dear child, now give you this gift, a memento
from Helen's hands, for your bride to wear at your longed-for wedding. Till then, keep it stored in your halls, looked after by your dear mother. And may you enjoy a safe return
to your well-built home and to your own dear country."
That said, she put it into his hands. He received it with pleasure.
The hero Peisistratos now took all the gifts and stowed them in the luggage box, gazing at them in wondering admiration.
Fair-headed Menelaös now led them into the house and had them all sit down upon chairs and benches,
and a servant brought hand-washing water in a beautiful
golden ewer and poured it over a silver basin so
they could wash, and drew up a polished table for them. The respected housekeeper brought in bread and served it along with many side dishes, giving freely of what there was,
while, nearby, Boethoös' son carved helpings of meat,
and the son of renowned Menelaös poured out the wine.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them. But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
Then Telemachos and the splendid son of Nestor
harnessed the horses and boarded the fine-wrought chariot
and drove out from the forecourt and the echoing colonnade. With them went Atreus' son, the fair-haired Menelaös,
his right hand holding enough mind-honeying wine
in a golden cup, so they might, on leaving, pour libations.
Now he stood in front of the chariot, and pledged them, saying:
"Farewell, young men-and to Nestor, shepherd of the people, take my greetings: to me he was like a kindly father
when we sons of Achaians were warring in the country of Troy."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying:
"All this indeed, Zeus' nursling, exactly as you say,
we'll recount to him on arrival. I only wish that as surely, when I return to Itháke, I'd find Odysseus at home,
and be able to tell him all the kindness I'd had from you before coming, all the fine presents that I was bringing home."
Just as he finished speaking, a bird flew in on the right,
an eagle, grasping a great white goose in its talons,
a tame bird out of the yard, and a crowd of men and women ran behind, shouting. The eagle swooped toward them
from the right, in front of the horses. They rejoiced at the sight,
and the spirits of all were comforted in their hearts.
Peisistratos, Nestor's son, was the first to speak. He said: "Consider now, Zeus' nursling, Menelaös, leader of hosts-
Was it for us that the god showed this sign, or for you yourself ?"
So he spoke. Menelaös the warlike was figuring in his mind
the right way to think, what might be his best response,
when long-robed Helen got in ahead of him, saying: "Listen to me! I shall prophesy now, as the immortals put it into my heart, how I think it will come to pass.
As this eagle seized the goose brought up in our household,
swooping down from the mountain where he was born and bred,
so Odysseus-many ills borne, having wandered far-
will come back home and take vengeance, or maybe is home already, and sowing the seeds of trouble for the suitors."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"So now may Zeus enact it, Here's loud-thundering husband!
Then there too I'd pray to you as I would to a god."
That said, he gave the horses a touch of the whip: they at once galloped eagerly out of the city toward the plain,
and strained all day at the yoke set about their necks,
till the sun went down and all the ways were in shadow,
and they came to Pherai, to the dwelling of Diokles
the son of Ortilochos, whom Alpheios begot, and there they spent the night, and he entertained them as guests.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
they harnessed the horses and boarded the inlaid chariot, and drove out from the forecourt and echoing colonnade.
At a touch of the whip the pair, nothing loath, sped forward, and soon made their way back to Pylos' steep citadel.
Then Telemachos spoke to the son of Nestor, saying:
"Son of Nestor, will you promise to do the thing I'll ask you, and then in fact do it? We're friends of long standing ourselves
because of our fathers' friendship. Besides, we're the same age, so this journey will simply establish our like-mindedness!
Don't take me on past my ship, Zeus' nursling, but leave me there:
I'm afraid the old man will detain me in his house against my will,
through an urge to befriend me. I need to get home quickly."
So he spoke; and the son of Nestor debated in his heart how he might properly give this promise and fulfill it;
and as he reflected, it struck him that this was the better course:
he turned his horses toward the swift ship and the seashore,
and there unpacked the fine gifts, laid them out in the ship's stern-
the clothes and gold Menelaös had given Telemachos,
whom he now encouraged, addressed with winged words, saying: "Embark now, quickly, and summon all your comrades
before I get home and break the news to the old man!
For this I know well, in my mind and heart: his spirit is so overbearing, he just won't let you go-
he'll come out here in person to escort you back: I don't think he'd mean to go home empty-handed! As it is, he'll be very
cross."
That said, he drove off his beautiful-maned horses
back to the Pylians' township, and quickly reached his home. Telemachos meanwhile urged on his comrades, saying:
"Put all the gear on the black ship in order, my comrades, and let's embark ourselves, and then be on our way."
So he spoke; they heard and promptly obeyed him,
and embarked at once, and seated themselves at their rowlocks.
Now while he was busy with prayer and sacrifice to Athene by the stern of the ship, he was approached by a person from a distant land, Argos-a fugitive murderer,
a seer, a man related by descent to Melampous,
who long ago was a dweller in Pylos, mother of flocks- a wealthy Pylian, occupant of a very large house, but now
a stranger in other men's country, fleeing from his own land and from great-hearted Neleus, noblest of living men,
who for a full year had kept his great wealth from him
by main force, for Melampous lay shackled in Phylakos' halls, under harsh constraint, and suffering grievous hardship because of Neleus' daughter, and the heavy infatuation which the Fury-that ruinous goddess-put in his mind.
And yet
he escaped his fate, and drove off the loud-lowing cattle
to Pylos from Phylake, paid out the godlike Neleus for his misdeed, and brought the girl home as a wife
for his own brother. He himself went to other men's land, to horse-pasturing Argos, where it was destined that he
should dwell, and hold sway over numerous Argives. There
he married a wife and established a high-roofed house, and sired Antiphates and Mantios, two sturdy sons.
Antiphates later begot great-hearted Oikles, and Oikles sired Amphiaraös, rouser of hosts, whom Zeus
of the aegis and Apollo both held in great affection
and befriended in every way. Yet he never reached old age's
threshold, but died in Thebai because of a woman's gifts.To him were born two sons, Amphilochos and Alkmaion, while Mantios begot Polypheides and Kleitos. The latter
Dawn, golden-throned, snatched away because of his beauty,
so that he might be numbered among the immortals; but high-spirited Polypheides Apollo made a seer,
by far the best of mortals, after Amphiaraös died.
He moved to Hyperesea when he fell out with his father,
and there he made his home, and prophesied to all mortals.
His son it was, Theoklymenos by name, who now
came up and stood by Telemachos. He found him pouring libations and praying, there by his black ship,
and he spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying:
"Friend, since I find you at sacrifice in this place,
I entreat you by these burnt offerings, by the god, and by your own head, and by the comrades who travel with you, answer what I ask truly, and hold back nothing:
Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents?"
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying:
"So, stranger, let me answer your questions quite honestly: I'm from Itháke by birth, and my father is Odysseus-
if ever he was-who by now must have met his grim destiny- which is why I've set out with my comrades in a black ship
and have come seeking news of my long-absent father."
Theoklymenos the godlike responded to him, saying: "I likewise have left my country, after killing a man
of my own clan: many brothers and kinsmen he has
in horse-pasturing Argos, with great power over Achaians.
It's to avoid meeting death and black fate at their hands
that I'm on the run. It's my fate to wander among men. Take me aboard your ship, as your suppliant fugitive, lest they murder me, for I think they're hot on my trail."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"I shall not, since you want it, debar you from my trim ship.
Come aboard! We'll look after you, with what little we have."
So saying, he took the other's bronze spear from him, and laid it at length on the deck of the shapely vessel, then he himself embarked on the seagoing ship,
and seated himself in the stern, and made a place beside him
for Theoklymenos too. His men cast off the stern warps, and Telemachos now issued orders to his comrades
to belay the tackle, and they promptly obeyed him.
The fir-wood mast they raised up and stepped in the hollow
mast block, held it in place with the forestays, and then hauled up the white sail with the halyards of plaited leather.
Grey-eyed Athene now sent them a blustery tailwind, gusting through the bright air, so the ship might swiftly complete her journey, speeding over the briny deep.
[They voyaged past The Springs, and sweet-streamed Chalkis],till the sun went down and all the ways were in shadow,
and the ship reached Pheai, driven on by the wind of Zeus, then skirted bright Elis, where the Epeians hold sway.
Onward from there Telemachos made for the SharpIslands,
uncertain in mind if he was going to dodge death or be captured.
Back in the hut, Odysseus and the noble swineherd
were at supper: the other men were eating the meal with them. When they had satisfied their desire for food and drink, Odysseus spoke among them, making trial of the swineherd,
to see if he'd still befriend him, invite him to stay there
in the farmstead, or urge him to try his luck in the city.
"Hear me out now, Eumaios, and all you other comrades! In the morning I'm minded to make my way to the city,
to beg for food, and not be a burden on you and your fellows.
So advise me well, and give me a reliable guide
to take me there. But I'll need to wander through the city
on my own, perhaps be given some bread, a cup of water. I might even go to the house of noble Odysseus,
and impart what news I have to prudent Penelope, mingle
in the company of the suitors, overbearing though they are,
to see if they'd spare me dinner from their limitless plenty.
I could offer them, there and then, services they might need- let me list them, and you pay attention and hear me out!-
Through the favor of Hermes the Guide, the god who endows
the endeavors of every man with elegance and renown,
in the matter of service, no other mortal could match me: building a fire well, or chopping up dry firewood,
or carving and roasting meat, or pouring out the wine-
all such things in which the common folk serve their betters."
Deeply disturbed you then answered him, swineherd Eumaios:
"Oh my, stranger, what can have put such a notion
into your mind? You must be set on your own destruction if you mean to go in among this company of suitors, whose violence and arrogance go up to the iron sky!
Not such as you are the servants of these people:
no indeed: it's young men, well dressed in mantles and tunics, their heads always slick with oil, their faces handsome,
who wait on them: their tables are kept well polished, and are heavily laden with bread and meat and wine.
No, you stay here, where no one's irked by your presence-
neither I, nor any of the other men I have here.
But when the dear son of Odysseus comes back home, he'll fit you out with a cloak and tunic, and send you wherever your heart and spirit say you should go."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Eumaios, I wish you could be as dear to Zeus the Father
as to me, whom you've saved from wandering and distress!
There's no worse evil for mortals than vagrancy; and yet
for the sake of their cursed bellies men incur grim hardship
[when wandering, grief, and pain assail any one of them].
But now, since you're keeping me here, and want me to wait for him, your master, now tell me of godlike Odysseus' mother and father, whom he left here on the edge of old age-
are they perhaps still living beneath the rays of the sun,
or are they dead by now and in the realm of Hades?"
Then the swineherd, leader of men, responded to him: "So, stranger, I'll give your question a truthful answer.
Laërtes still lives, but constantly prays to Zeus
that the spirit may fade from his limbs within his halls,
because of his terrible grief for the son who's absent,
and for his wise wedded wife, who by dying caused him most sorrow, and brought him to old age before his time. She died of grief, lamenting her glorious son-
a miserable death, that I'd wish no man to suffer
that lived here as my close friend and treated me kindly.
So long as she lived, though it was in a state of sorrow,
It gave me pleasure to ask and enquire after her, since she had raised me herself, together with long-robed Ktiméne, her clever daughter, whom she bore as her youngest child.
With her I was reared, and she favored me scarcely less.
But when we both reached the longed-for prime of youth,
her they saw married on Same, and she had countless bride-gifts; but me she clothed in a mantle and tunic, both
of the finest stuff, shod me with sandals, and then sent me
out on the estate. Yet at heart it was me she cared for more.
These days I go short of such things, yet the blessed gods prosper the work of my hands, at which I labor:
that lets me eat and drink, care for respected guests.
Yet from my mistress I hear nothing pleasant, either
by word or deed, for an evil has fallen on the household-
these arrogant men! The servants greatly need and want to speak personally with their mistress, check each detail, eat and drink, and then take some tid-bit back with them
to the fields-such are the things as warm a servant's heart."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Indeed, swineherd Eumaios, how little you must have been when parted so far from your country and your parents!
But come now, tell me this, and give me the true answer:
Was the wide-wayed city of men destroyed in which
your father and lady mother had their dwelling?
Or when you were out alone with your sheep or cattle, did hostile men carry you off in their ships for sale here to your master's house, and he paid a good price for you?"
Then the swineherd, leader of men, responded to him, saying:
"Stranger, since you're questioning me about these matters, listen in silence now at your ease, and drink your wine
while you sit here. These nights are endless: you can sleep, you can also listen for pleasure. No need to bed down before the time comes. Too much sleep can be exhausting.
If any one of the rest of you feels the urge to do so, let him go out and sleep in the open: then, when it's dawn,
get a bite to eat, and take care of our master's swine. But we two will drink and feast in the hut, and enjoy hearing about each other's wretched misfortunes
as we recall them. A man looking back can find pleasure
even in grief, one who's suffered and wandered much.
"So now let me answer the questions that you asked me. There's an island called Syria-you may have heard tell of it- at the turning points of the sun, out beyond Ortygie,
It's not very populous, but possesses excellent terrain:
good for cattle and sheep, many vineyards, abundant wheat.
No famine ever afflicts this land, nor does any other hateful disease appear as a plague to wretched mortals, but when the tribes of mankind grow old in the city,
then comes silver-bowed Apollo, together with Artemis,
and assails and slays them with his gentle arrows.
Two cities there are: all the land's divided between them, and over them both my father held sway as king- Ktesios, Ormenos' son, who was likened to the immortals.
"Thither Phoenicians came, men famous for their ships,
sharp traffickers, countless trinkets in their black vessel.
Now there was in my father's household a Phoenician woman, tall and good-looking, highly skilled in fine handiwork,
and her these crafty Phoenicians set about to beguile.
First, while she was washing clothes near the hollow ship,
one of them made love to her, a thing that fuddles the senses
of truly feminine women, even one that's well-behaved.
Then he asked her who she was and from where, and she at once pointed out my father's high-roofed house, and declared:
'I come from Sidon, that bronze-rich city, and am
the daughter of Arybas, a man who had rivers of wealth; but a bunch of Taphian pirates kidnapped me on my way back from the fields, and brought me here. I was sold
to the man who lives up there, and he paid a good price for me.'
"Then the man who'd secretly had her responded to her, saying:
'Would you like to go back with us now and get to see
the high-roofed house of your father and mother?-them too, for they're still alive, and the word is they're very rich?'
"Then the woman responded to him in these words, saying:
'This indeed might be done, if all you sailors were willing
to swear an oath that you'd deliver me home unharmed.'
"So she spoke, and they all swore the oath as she demanded. But when they'd sworn, and completed the terms of the oath, the woman addressed them again, in these words, saying:
'Keep quiet now, and let none of your crew accost me
if we chance to encounter each other, either out on the street or at the well, in case someone goes to his dwelling
and tells the old man, so that he becomes suspicious
and keeps me closely confined, and plans your destruction.
So don't forget what I say, and be quick with the barter
for your homeward voyage! When your ship is fully laden, then contact me up at the house, and I will come,
with any gold I can find; and there's one other thing I'd be glad to give you in return for my passage-a son
of my master, whose house-nurse I am, a clever child
who trots along at my side when I go out: I'd bring him aboard with me-he'd fetch you a gigantic price, wherever you chose to sell him abroad to some foreign buyer.'
"So she spoke, and went off back to the splendid mansion.
They stayed there in our country for an entire year,
and by trafficking piled up the goods in their hollow ship. But when the ship's hold was full-laden for their return, they then sent a messenger to alert the woman.
A sharp-witted man it was that came to my father's dwelling,
bringing a golden necklace interlaced with amber beads.
So while in the hall the maidservants and my lady mother were handling and looking at this and making their offer to buy it, the man nodded silently to the woman,
and, having done this, departed, making for the hollow ship,
and she took me by the hand, led me out of the house.
There in the forecourt she found the cups and tables of the men who'd been dining, associates of my father who'd left for a council session, with public discussion.
She quickly hid three cups under the front fold of her dress
and carried them off. In my innocence I went with her.
So the sun went down, and all the ways were in shadow, and we hurriedly made our way to the famous harbor where these Phoenician men's swift ship was moored. They now embarked, and sailed out over the watery ways,
with us two on board as well: Zeus gave us a tailwind.
For six days we sailed, both night and day; but when Zeus, son of Kronos, brought on the seventh day, then Artemis, divine archer, struck the woman down, and she fell in the bilge like a sea tern, with a thud.
Her corpse they threw overboard to end as food for seals
and fishes, and I was left there, grieving at heart.
Now wind and wave in their passage carried us to Itháke, where Laërtes bought me with his resources. Thus it was that I first happened to set eyes on this country."
To him then Odysseus, Zeus' scion, responded, saying:
"Indeed, Eumaios, you've stirred the spirit in my breast by telling me all the heartfelt sorrows you endured!
Yet surely you had some good along with the suffering
from Zeus? After all your troubles you ended in the household
of a decent man, who takes good care to provide you with food and drink, and you have a good life; whereas I
got here as a vagrant, who'd strayed through many folks' cities."
These were the things they talked about to each other.
Now they lay down and slept-briefly, not long, for soon
came fair-throned Dawn. And meanwhile Telemachos' comrades made landfall. They furled the sail, unstepped the mast,
smartly, and rowed the ship on till they reached their anchorage, then belayed the stern warps, threw out the anchor stones,
and themselves, disembarking on the strand of the seashore,
prepared their meal, and mixed the bright red wine;
and when they'd satisfied their desire for food and drink, sagacious Telemachos spoke first among them, saying:
"The rest of you now row the black ship on to the city. I'm going out to inspect the fields and the herdsmen,
and I'll come into town this evening when I've seen to the estate.
Early tomorrow I'll give you, as wages for your journey,
a square meal of meat, with some sweetly drinkable wine."
Then godlike Theoklymenos addressed him, saying:
"Where should I go, dear child? To which particular house
of the men in authority over rugged Itháke?
Or shall I go straight to your house-yours and your mother's?"
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"In different circumstances I'd tell you to go to our house, where there's no lack of hospitality; but for yourself
that's not a good idea, since I'll be away, and my mother
won't see you: she seldom comes out in the house to face
the suitors, but works at her loom apart from them, upstairs. But I'll tell you another man to whom you can go instead- Eurymachos, glorious son of skillful Polybos,
whom nowadays the Ithákans treat like a god, for he
is their best man by far, as well as the most determined to marry my mother, acquire Odysseus' privileges!
Yet Olympian Zeus alone, the sky-dweller, knows whether he'll meet with his day of ill destiny before that wedding."
As he spoke, a bird flew by on the right: a falcon,
Apollo's swift messenger, clutching a dove in its talons, and plucking its feathers, that were shed on the ground midway between the ship and Telemachos himself.
Then Theoklymenos called him aside from his comrades,
and clasping him by the hand, exclaimed: "Telemachos,
not without some god's will did that bird fly on our right! I knew, when I saw it, that this had to be an omen!
There is no other family that's more kingly than yours
in the whole realm of Itháke: you'll hold power forever."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"If only these words of yours, stranger, might be fulfilled!
Then would you quickly know friendship and gifts in plenty from me, so that any who met you would call you blessed."
That said, he then addressed Peiraios, a faithful comrade:
"Peiraios, son of Klytios, in all else you're the most
reliable of the comrades who accompanied me to Pylos:
so now, please, take this stranger, give him a proper welcome in your home, with all due honor, until I come back."
Peiraios, famous spearman, responded to him, saying:
"Telemachos, no matter how long you may stay out here,
I shall take care of this man: as a guest he'll lack for nothing."
So saying, he boarded the ship, and ordered his companions to cast off the stern warps and to embark themselves.
They at once went on board, and sat down at their rowlocks.
But Telemachos shod himself in his well-made sandals,
and took his sturdy spear, tipped with sharp-pointed bronze, from the deck of the ship. They cast off the stern warps, pushed clear, and made for the city, just as Telemachos,
dear son of godlike Odysseus, had ordered them to do.
But him his feet bore on, briskly striding, till he reached
the farmstead where were pigs unnumbered, beside which slept the good swineherd, with kind thoughts for his masters.


BOOK 16

The two in the hut, Odysseus and the noble swineherd, had stirred up the fire, and were making breakfast at dawn,
and had sent out the herdsmen with droves of pigs to pasture. Their usually noisy dogs now fawned round Telemachos,
not barking as he approached them. Noble Odysseus noticed
both the dogs' silent fawning and the sound of footsteps,
and at once he addressed Eumaios with winged words, saying: "Eumaios, there's somebody coming here-one of your comrades, or some other acquaintance, because the dogs aren't barking
but making up to him-and I can hear his footsteps."
He'd not yet finished speaking when his own dear son appeared in the doorway. Amazed, the swineherd sprang up, and the vessels fell from his hands with which he'd been busy mixing the bright red wine. He went to greet his master
and kissed his head and his two bright shining eyes
and both his hands, tears falling thick and fast.
As a loving father welcomes his own dear son's return from some distant land, after a ten-year absence-
his only son, late-born, for whose sake he's suffered much-
so now did the noble swineherd clasp godlike Telemachos
and kiss him all over, as though he'd escaped from death,
and, still weeping, then address him with winged words, saying: "You're back, Telemachos, sweet light of my eyes! I thought
I'd never see you again when you sailed off to Pylos!
Come in now, dear child, and let me pleasure my heart
with the sight of you inside here, now you've arrived!
For you don't often make visits to the herdsmen on the estate, but stay in town: these days it would seem your fancy is
to observe the baneful throng of these men, the suitors."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"So it shall be, old fellow. It's on your account I'm here, to see you myself, and have you tell me whether
my mother is still in the house, or by now some other man has got her in marriage, so that maybe Odysseus' bed,
for lack of occupants, is full of foul spiders' webs."
Then the swineherd, leader of men, responded to him, saying: "Indeed, she still holds on with an all too steadfast spirit
here in your halls, and always the sorrowful nights and days too waste her away with ceaseless weeping."
After thus speaking he took the bronze spear from him,
and Telemachos entered, passing over the stone threshold. As he approached, Odysseus, his father, offered him his seat, But Telemachos, facing him, refused the offer, saying:
"Sit down, stranger: we'll find us another seat somewhere
in our own farmstead-here's the man's who'll set it for us."
So he spoke. Odysseus sat down again. For Telemachos
the swineherd spread green brushwood, put a fleece over it, and Odysseus' dear son now seated himself, and the swineherd set before each of them platters of roast meat
left over from what they'd eaten the day before,
and hastily put fresh cuts of bread in the baskets,
and in his ivy-wood bowl mixed some honey-sweet wine, and then sat down himself, facing godlike Odysseus.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them;
But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
Telemachos then addressed the noble swineherd, saying: "Dad, where did this stranger come from? How did sailors bring him here to Itháke? Who did they say they were? For I don't imagine he made his way here on foot."
To him then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"Very well, child: I'll tell you the whole true story. He claims to be from broad Krete by birth. He says he's wandered
all over, from one human settlement to another,
a vagrant: that's the fate some divinity spun for him.
But now he's run away from a vessel of the Thesprotians
and come to my farmstead. I put him into your hands. Do what you like with him. He says he's your suppliant."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"Eumaios, what you just said embarrasses me! For how
am I to give this stranger a good welcome in my house?
I'm only a youth still, I don't trust the strength of my hands against any man who may pick a quarrel with me.
As for my mother, the heart in her breast is divided, whether to stay there with me and run the household,
respecting her husband's bed and the voice of the people,
or to go off with whoever's the best of the Achaians
as a suitor there in her halls, who offers the richest gifts. And regarding this stranger, since he's come to your home, I'll clothe him in mantle and tunic, garments of quality,
and give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet,
and send him wherever his heart and spirit dictate.
Or, if you like, keep him here and care for him in the farmstead, and I'll send him down clothes and all the food he needs
to eat, so he won't be the ruin of you and your comrades.
But up there I won't let him go, to sojourn among
the suitors, for they're overweening and wanton, and may mock him: that would cause me the greatest embarrassment. It's hard for one man to get anything done against many, however strong he may be: they have far the greater power."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus now addressed him, saying:
"Friend-surely it's proper that I should reply-indeed
you rend my heart as I listen to all you tell me
of the reckless acts that these suitors are now committing in your halls, against the will of one such as yourself !
Tell me, do you let yourself be oppressed? Or is it
that some god's word has led your countrymen to hate you?
Or is it your brothers you blame, whom a man relies on in a tight corner, even when a major feud arises?
I wish I was really as young now as I am in spirit,
or the son of peerless Odysseus, or the man himself-
might return from his wandering: there's still room for hope:then might some foreign mortal at once cut off my head
if I didn't prove myself a disaster to all those fellows when I came to the main hall of Laërtes' son Odysseus!
Were they to overwhelm me, one man alone, by numbers,
I'd much rather go down fighting, killed in my own home,
than have to go on witnessing these unseemly actions- strangers maltreated, women servants forcibly dragged and manhandled everywhere in this beautiful building,
wine recklessly squandered, men devouring my food
without purpose or limit, no end to the business in sight."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"So, stranger, I'll give you a full and truthful answer. The people in general do not hate or resent me,
nor have I brothers to blame, whom a man relies on
in a tight corner, even when a major feud arises.
The fact is, our line's been kept single by the son of Kronos: Arkeisios sired Laërtes, his one and only son;
Then he in turn had one son, Odysseus; and Odysseus
had only me, left me here in his halls, got no joy of me.
That's why countless enemies now occupy our house.
For all the highborn leaders who lord it over the islands- Doulichion, Same, and forested Zákynthos,
besides those who rule as princes in rugged Itháke-
are all courting my mother, and wasting my property.
She neither rejects this hateful marriage nor is able
to end the business; so they go on eating up my estate
and waste it away-very soon they'll tear me to pieces too! Yet indeed all these matters rest on the knees of the gods.
But now, dad, you go quickly, tell strong-minded Penelope
that I'm safely back here for her, all the way from Pylos.
I'm going to stay on here, and you come straight back yourself when you've told her, and only her: not a single other Achaian should get wind of it. Many people are planning trouble for me."
To him, then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"Noted and understood. You're spelling it out for the wise. But come, tell me this, and give me an honest answer: Should I not, this same trip, also take the news to Laërtes, poor man? For a while, despite his great grief over Odysseus,
he'd still keep an eye on the fields, still eat and drink
with the servants at home whenever the mood so took him; but now, from the day when you went off by ship to Pylos, they say he no longer eats or drinks as before,
or goes out to the estate, but sits wailing and weeping
in lamentation, and the flesh is wasting from his bones."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying:
"That's too sad, but for now we'll leave him, despite our grief. For if mortals somehow could have all they wanted, then our first choice would be the day for my father's return.
When you've given your message, come back. Don't wander off
over the fields after him, but instruct my mother
to send off a servant, the housekeeper, as soon as may be, secretly: she could take a message to the old man."
With that he sent off the swineherd, who found his sandals,
put them on, and left for the city. Nor did Athene fail
to see the swineherd Eumaios depart from the farmstead, and herself approached now, in the likeness of a woman, one tall and handsome, and skilled in fine handiwork.
She stood outside the hut's entrance, visible to Odysseus;
but Telemachos neither saw her in front of him nor
was aware of her presence: gods are not clearly manifest to all.
But the dogs, like Odysseus, saw her: they didn't bark, but slunk-
terrified, whining-to the far side of the farmstead.
She nodded to noble Odysseus: he saw it, and went
out from the hall, past the great wall of the courtyard,
and stood before her. Athene then addressed him, saying: "Laërtes' son, Zeus' scion, resourceful Odysseus,
the time has come: say the word to your son, don't hide it, so that you both may plot death and doom for the suitors
for when you go back to the far-famed city: I myself
shall not be slow to join you: I'm ready for this battle!"
That said, Athene touched him with her golden wand. She dressed him first in a new well-laundered mantle and tunic, made his body more youthful and powerful.
His complexion grew swarthy again, his cheeks filled out,
and the beard on his chin darkened once more. This done, she took herself off, and Odysseus now went back
into the hut. His dear son was amazed at the sight, and averted his eyes in alarm, lest this might be a god,
and spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying:
"Stranger, you look quite different from what you did earlier: you have different clothes on, your color isn't the same!
You must be one of the gods who hold broad heaven!
Be gracious, that we may bring you acceptable offerings
and golden gifts, finely wrought. Only spare us, be merciful!"
To him then much-enduring noble Odysseus responded: "I am no kind of god! Why liken me to the immortals?
No, I am your father, for whose sake you are grieving and suffering much from the violence of men."
So saying
he kissed his son, and the tears ran down his cheeks that hitherto he'd always firmly held back; but Telemachos-
not yet convinced that this man was really his father- once more spoke out, and responded to him, saying "You can't be Odysseus, my father! No, this is some deity
that's deceiving me, so that I'll grieve more bitterly hereafter! There's no way a mortal man could contrive all this
by his own unaided wit-it required a god to help him,
who could easily as he wanted make him either young or old. For you, a moment ago, were an old man, meanly clad,
whereas now you resemble the gods who possess broad heaven."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Telemachos, it's not fitting, when your own father is here, in the house, to be so astonished, indeed suspicious!
I tell you, no other Odysseus will ever come here-
It is I, such as I am, who have suffered much, wandered far,
and now, in the twentieth year, have come back home! What you see here's the work of Athene, leader of hosts,
who transforms me however she wants, for she has the power- sometimes to resemble a beggar, then again in the likeness
of a young man, his body decked out in expensive clothes!
Easy enough for the gods, who possess broad heaven, both to exalt a mortal man, and to debase him."
That said, he sat down. Telemachos, shedding tears, cried out, and flung his arms round his own good father,
and a longing arose in them both for lamentation:
their sobs came thicker and louder than the cries of birds, vultures or sea eagles with hooked talons, whose chicks hunters stole from their nests before they were full-fledged- just as piteous were their sobs and the tears they shed.
And now the sun's light would have set on their lamentation
had not Telemachos asked a quick question of his father:
"On what kind of ship, dear father, was it that sailors brought you here to Itháke? And who did they claim to be? For I don't imagine you made your way here on foot."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him, saying:
"So then, my child, I'll tell you the whole true story.
The Phaiakians brought me here, men famous for their ships- other men too they convey, whoever approaches them-
and ferrying me asleep in a swift ship over the deep
they set me down on Itháke, and gave me splendid gifts,
bronze and gold in plenty, and woven clothing,
all of which by the gods' grace is lying stored in caves.
And now I've come here at Athene's instigation
so that we may make plans together for killing our enemies.
So come, count up and tell me the full tally of the suitors,
that I may know how many, and who, these fellows are, and after thinking it over in my peerless mind, decide whether we two are sufficient to stand against them alone,
without the aid of others, or will need to round up support."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"Father, I've always been told about your great renown,
that you were both a tough combatant and a shrewd planner; But what you just said is too much, I'm astounded! No way could two men fight so many, and strong men too!
not just a group of ten suitors, or even twice that,
but many, many more! Let me tally them for you:
From Doulichion there are no fewer than fifty-two chosen youths, with six servants to wait on them; from Same, the count lists two dozen individuals;
from Zákynthos, there are two score youths of the Achaians,
and from Itháke itself, a dozen, all from the best families, and with these Medon the herald and the godlike minstrel, and a couple of serving men, skilled at carving roast meat.
Should we encounter all these indoors, then bitter and desperate
would be the revenge that you're here to take on their violence.
So, is there any supporter that you can you bring to mind, someone who'd gladly step forward to help the two of us?"
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Well now, I'll tell you, and you listen and pay attention,
and decide for yourself if Athene with Zeus the Father
will suffice, or if I should find some other defender too."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Good indeed are these two defenders whom you mention, sitting high up there in the clouds: between them they rule
the rest of mankind, not to mention the immortal gods!"
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying: "Not long, for sure, will those two remain mere spectators
of the fierce battle, when between the suitors and ourselves where Ares' strength lies is decided, here in my halls!
But for now, at daybreak tomorrow you must be off
back home, and mingle there with the arrogant suitors. As for me, the swineherd will escort me later into town, in the likeness of a wretched and elderly beggar: and if
in the house they mistreat me, still let the heart in your breast
endure the sight of the pain I suffer; I may be dragged
by the heels through the house, and then thrown out, or pelted with missiles-nevertheless you must look on and bear it!
You can tell them to give over their mindless folly, using gentle words to dissuade them; but they won't take
any notice of you; for indeed, their fatal day is at hand!
And another thing I'll tell you, and you take it to heart: When Athene, resourceful counselor, puts it into my mind, I'll nod my head to you, and you, when you see that,
must gather up all the weapons that are lying in the halls
and stack them away at the back of the lofty storeroom,
all of them; disarm the suitors with soothing words when they note their absence, and start to ask you about them; say:
'I stored them away from the smoke, since they no longer look as they did when Odysseus left them on going off to Troy,
but are blackened with all the fire's breath that's got to them. And there's a greater concern Kronos' son has put in my mind,
that when you're flushed with wine you may pick some quarrel among you and wound one another, and so disgrace
your feast and your wooing: for iron of itself attracts a man.'
"But for us two alone leave behind two swords and two spears, and a couple of oxhide shields that we can heft in our hands,
running up and seizing them; as for those fellows, Pallas
Athene and Zeus the Counselor will befuddle their wits!And another thing I'll tell you, and you take it to heart:
If indeed you are my son and of our blood, then don't
let anyone know that Odysseus has come back home- Don't break the news to Laërtes, or to the swineherd, or to any household servant-or to Penelope herself !
You and I by ourselves will test the loyalty of the women,
and also make trial of the menservants, find out which ones
honor the two of us, have respect for us in their hearts,
and which are indifferent, and scorn you, man though you are."
Then his illustrious son responded to him, saying:
"My father, I think you'll find out the quality of my spirit
soon enough: I'm not enslaved by any slack-mindedness!
However, I really think this plan of yours would profit neither one of us, therefore I urge you to reconsider.
You'd spend long hours, to no purpose, going round the estate making trial of each individual, while in your halls
those arrogant men, at ease, go on squandering your goods!
Regarding the women, however, I do urge you to find out which of them disregard you, and which ones are innocent; but as for the hands at the farmsteads, I'd prefer that we don't make trial of them now, but take care of that business later,
if it's true that you have some portent from aegis-bearing Zeus."
Such was the conversation they had with one another.
But meanwhile the well-built ship put in to Itháke
that had brought Telemachos and all his comrades from Pylos; and they, on coming into the deep-water harbor,
drove the black ship ashore, high up on dry land,
where proud attendants unloaded their gear and promptly carried off the resplendent gifts to the house of Klytios.
They sent a herald ahead to the house of Odysseus,
to deliver a message to prudent Penelope-saying
that Telemachos had landed, but had ordered the ship
to sail on to the city-so that the noble queen
might not become worried, and shed tears of tenderness.
The two of them, herald and swineherd, encountered each other on the same errand, both bringing the news to Odysseus' wife.
So when they arrived at the godlike queen's abode,
the herald spoke up in the midst of the handmaids, saying: "By now, O queen, your dear son is back in this country." But the swineherd went up to Penelope, stood beside her, and passed on all that her dear son had told him to say;
and when he'd delivered his whole message, he departed
the courtyard and hall, and went back among the pigs.
The suitors, however, were troubled, and downcast at heart, and went out from the hall past the great courtyard wall, and there, in front of the main gates, they sat down.
Eurymachos, Polybos' son, was the first to address them, saying:
"My friends, a great feat has been arrogantly accomplished
by Telemachos-this voyage, which we thought he'd never make! So now let us launch a black ship, the best one we have,
and assemble a crew of sailors as oarsmen, who'll bring
word without delay to those others to sail back home at once."
He'd not finished speaking when Amphinomos, looking round, saw a vessel there in the deep-water harbor, its crew
busy furling the sail, and with oars in their hands.
He, with a cheerful laugh, now addressed his comrades, saying:
"No need to send messages: here they are back home!
Either some god told them this, or they themselves observed Telemachos' ship sailing past, but couldn't intercept it."
So he spoke. They now got up and went to the seashore,
and the crew drove the black ship ashore, high up on dry land,
where proud attendants unloaded their gear, while they
themselves all went to assembly, but would not permit any others to sit with them, either young or old; and next
Eupeithes' son Antinoös addressed them, saying: "Look here, see how the gods have saved this fellow from harm!
Day after day our lookouts perched up on the windy heights,
one succeeding another; and when the sun went down
we never spent nights ashore, but out on the deep sea cruised in a swift ship until the bright dawn came up, lying in wait for Telemachos, to capture and do away with
the man himself: but some deity brought him safely home.
Now we here need to think up some other sorry end for Telemachos, not let him escape us; I don't think
that while he still lives this business of ours will flourish. He himself is no slouch at planning and ideas,
and the people here are no longer completely on our side.
We must act first, before this fellow brings all the Achaians to assembly-for I don't think he'll let up on us one whit, but will give full play to his wrath, stand up among them all
and report how we planned his murder, but failed to catch him;
and they won't approve of us on hearing of such low deeds,
and may take low action themselves, expel us all
from our homeland, so that we end up on foreign soil! We must arrest him while he's on his estate, well away from the city,
or else on the road. We can then seize his property
ourselves, share it fairly between us-but leave the house
for his mother to occupy, and whichever man marries her.
Still, if you dislike this proposal, would rather choose
that he stay alive, and keep all his ancestral wealth, then we should stop consuming his nice rich store of goods
gathering here: let each one of us rather court her from his own halls with gifts, seek to win her; she'll then marry
whoever offers the most, who comes as her destined man."
So he spoke, and each one of them became hushed in silence. Amphinomos was the next man to speak and address them,
the illustrious son of lord Nisos, Aretias' son. He led the suitors who came from Doulichion, rich in wheat
and pasture; he was the one whose conversation most pleased Penelope: he had an intelligent mind.
He, with friendly intent, now spoke before the assembly:
"My friends, I'd myself prefer that we should not do away with
Telemachos: it's a most serious business, this spilling
of royal blood. No, we must first learn the will of the gods. If the ordinances of great Zeus confer their approval,
then I will kill him myself and urge the rest to do so;
but should the gods dissuade us, then I say we must desist."
So spoke Amphinomos. They agreed with what he said, so they now got up, and left for the house of Odysseus, and on arrival sat down on the polished chairs there.
Now prudent Penelope made a fresh decision: to show
herself to her suitors, so outrageous and arrogant;
for she'd learnt in her halls of the plan to murder her son from Medon the herald, who'd overheard their discussion. Now she went down to the hall along with her handmaids; and when, bright among women, she reached the suitors,
she stood by the pillar supporting the close-packed roof,
and, holding the shining veil in front of her face, upbraided Antinoös, addressing him by his name, and saying:
"Antinoös, wantonly violent, deviser of evil! Yet they say that you beat all those of your age in the land of Itháke
as speaker and counselor! But such a man you are not!
You madman, why are you plotting death and destruction for Telemachos? Why ignore those suppliants who have Zeus as their witness? To plot evil against each other
is impious! Don't you know how your father came here in terror,
on the run from his countrymen, who were furious with him
because he'd joined up with a group of Taphian pirates to raid the Thesprotians, when these were allies of ours? So they were hot to waste him, to rip out his life spirit, and wholly devour his great and abundant livelihood.
But Odysseus held and restrained them, despite their urgency.
It's his substance you eat without payment, his wife you're courting, his son whom you plan to kill. This distresses me greatly.
So stop it, I tell you, and make the others stop too."
Then Eurymachos, Polybos' son, responded to her, saying:
"Ikarios' daughter, prudent Penelope, please don't worry!
You've no need to let these matters disturb your mind.
That man does not live, nor shall do so, nor shall ever be born who'll lay violent hands on your son Telemachos
so long as I'm still alive and have sight upon this earth!
For this I'll declare to you, and indeed it shall come to pass:
straightway would his black blood gush out around my spear, since indeed me too Odysseus, that sacker of cities,
used often to set on his knees, would put morsels of roast meat into my hands, and hold the red wine to my lips.
So Telemachos is by far the dearest of men to me,
and he has no need, let me tell him, to fear death-not, at least, at the suitors' hands. From the gods, there's no dodging it."
Thus he spoke,
to cheer her, while planning Telemachos' death himself.
She now went back to her shining upper chamber
and there wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
grey-eyed Athene shed sweet sleep upon her eyelids.
At evening, the noble swineherd returned to Odysseus and his son, and they set about preparing their supper,
having slaughtered a yearling pig. Then Athene approached,
and standing beside Odysseus, son of Laërtes, tapped him
with her wand, and once more made him an elderly man, and put threadbare clothing on him, for fear the swineherd might recognize him at sight, and then go off and tell prudent Penelope, not keep the news to himself.
Telemachos was the first to address the swineherd, saying:
"You're back, noble Eumaios! What news is there from town? Are the proud suitors returned by now from their ambush, or still watching out for me on my homeward journey?"
To him swineherd Eumaios, you then responded, saying:
"I wasn't concerned to go wandering all through town
enquiring about this matter: my mind was made up
to hurry back here once I'd delivered my message. A swift messenger from your comrades then met up with me,
a herald, who was the first to break the news to your mother.
And there's one other thing I know, which I saw for myself:
I was well up above the city-where the hill of Hermesis- on my way, when I noticed a fast ship putting in
to our harbor: there was a crowd of men aboard her,
and she was loaded down with shields and two-edged spears,
and I thought that it must be them, but I can't be certain."
So he spoke; and Telemachos, princely in power, smiled,
with a quick glance at his father, but avoiding the swineherd's eye.
When they'd finished their work and got their supper ready, they sat down to eat: no one lacked his fair share of the meal.
And when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
their minds turned to rest, and they welcomed the gift of sleep.


BOOK 17

When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered, Telemachos, dear son of godlike Odysseus, then fastened under his feet his fine sandals, picked out
a sturdy spear, that was comfortably fitted to his grasp,
and, eager to leave for town, addressed the swineherd, saying:
"Old fellow, I'm off to the city now, so that my mother may actually see me: I have a feeling she won't
give over her ghastly wailing and tearful lamentation until she sees me in person! Here's what I want you to do:
Take this unfortunate stranger into town, so he can
beg there for his dinner: whoever so wishes can give him a crust and a cupful. No way can I burden myself with the rest of mankind, with these troubles of my own!
If this angers the stranger, so much the worse for him
will it be: it's my pleasure to speak the honest truth."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to him, saying: "Friend, neither do I myself want to be kept back here!
For a beggar it's better to beg for his dinner in town than out in the country: whoever so wishes can feed me.
No longer am I of an age to hang on here at the farmstead
and do whatever some man in charge tells me I must!
Off you go: this fellow here will take me as you ordered- when I've warmed myself at the fire, and the sun heats up!
For the clothes I have on are threadbare: I might be overcome
by the dawn frost. You say, too, it's a long way into town."
So he spoke. Telemachos went out through the farmstead with rapid strides, busy thinking up trouble for the suitors. When he reached his pleasantly sited dwelling, he stood the spear he was carrying up against a lofty pillar,
and himself went in, stepping over the stone threshold.
The first to see him by far was the old nurse Eurykleia as she spread fleeces over the richly decorated chairs.
Weeping, she rushed to greet him, and the other handmaids of stout-hearted Odysseus now came crowding round them
and kissed his head and shoulders in loving welcome.
Now prudent Penelope came down from her chamber, in appearance like Artemis, or like golden Aphrodite,and burst into tears as she hugged her own dear son, and kissed his head and both his bright shining eyes,
and, between sobs, addressed him in winged words, saying:
"You're back, Telemachos, sweet light of my eyes! I thought I'd never see you again when you sailed off to Pylos- against my will, secretly, to seek news of your dear father!
So come now, tell me in detail what sightings you had of him."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to her, saying:
"Mother, don't make me cry, don't stir up my emotions when I've only just escaped sheer destruction! Instead
go upstairs to your chamber, take your handmaids with you, and wash yourself, put on a set of clean clothes,
then pray to all the gods, with full, perfect sacrifices,
that Zeus may one day enact deeds of retribution for us!
I shall now go to the place of assembly, and invite home
the guest that came with me on my voyage back from Pylos. I sent him on ahead with my godlike comrades, and told
Peiraios to take him back to his house, and give him
a kindly welcome, look after him till I myself arrived."
So he spoke: her own answer remained unwinged.She washed herself, and put on a set of clean clothes,
and vowed to make full, perfect sacrifices to all
the gods if Zeus would enact deeds of retribution for them.
Telemachos made his way out through the hall, his spear grasped in one hand, two hunting dogs following at his heels, and marvelous was the grace that Athene shed upon him,
so that all the people gazed at him in amazement as he came,
and the haughty suitors now gathered all around him,
speaking fair words, but privately plotting trouble.
He, however, avoided the main crowd, and went over
to where Mentor, Antiphos, and Halitherses were sitting, men who from the start had been his father's comrades,
and sat with them, and they questioned him on every detail
of his trip. Peiraios, famed spearman, then came over, bringing the stranger through the city to the assembly.
Telemachos was not slow to join his guest, but approached him. First to speak was Peiraios, who now addressed him, saying:
"Telemachos, send women over to my house now, at once,
so I can deliver to you the gifts Menelaös gave you."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Peiraios, we don't yet know how this business may turn out. If the haughty suitors secretly slay me in my own halls,
and share out all my family goods between them, then
I want you, not one of them, to keep and enjoy these things;
But if I contrive death and destiny for that lot, then bring all the stuff to my house, and I'll be glad to get it."
That said, he took the stranger, so sorely tried, back home.
When they reached his pleasantly sited dwelling, they took off
their cloaks and laid them on the seats and the high chairs and went off to the polished bathtubs and had baths.
After the handmaids had washed them, massaged them with oil, and dressed them in woolen mantles and tunics, they came
out from the bathtubs and seated themselves on the chairs,
and a servant brought hand-washing water in a beautiful
golden ewer and poured it over a silver basin
so they could wash, and drew up a polished table for them.
The respected housekeeper brought in bread and served it
along with many side dishes, giving freely of what there was.
His mother sat facing Telemachos by the hall's main pillar,
settled back in her chair, spinning fine yarn on her distaff.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them. But when they had satisfied their desire for food and drink,
it was prudent Penelope who opened the conversation, saying:
"Telemachos, I'm going back now to my upper chamber, to lie down on my bed, that's become a bed of sorrow, always damp with my tears, ever since Odysseus set out
with the sons of Atreus for Ilion. Yet you couldn't be bothered,
before the haughty suitors arrived in the house, to tell me
any clear news you may have about your father's return."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"Very well, mother, I'll give you a true and complete account. We traveled to Pylos, to Nestor, shepherd of the people,
who gave me a warm welcome in his lofty dwelling
as an honored guest, the way a father might treat his son back home from a long spell abroad: with just such kindness he looked after me, both he and his glorious sons.
But of steadfast-minded Odysseus, living or dead, he told me
he'd heard not one thing, from any man on earth.
He sent me to Atreus' son, famed spearman Menelaös, in a carpentered chariot drawn by his own horses;
and there I saw Argive Helen, on whose account, and by the gods' will, Argives and Trojans endured such hardship.
Then straight off Menelaös, good at the war cry, asked me
what it was I'd come in search of to lordly Lakedaimon. Whereupon I then told him the whole truth of the matter. At this he responded to me with the following statement: 'I tell you, it was indeed in the bed of a brave warrior
that these fellows, cowards themselves, hoped they might lie!
As when in a thicket, the lair of a powerful lion,
a doe has laid to sleep her newborn suckling fawns and goes off, traversing foothills and grassy glens in search of pasture, and the lion returns to his den
and on both her fawns unleashes a ghastly fate-just so
will Odysseus unleash a ghastly fate on these men!
How I wish-by Zeus the Father and Athene and Apollo!- that he, as strong as he was that time in well-built Lesbos when he stood up and wrestled a bout with Philomeleides,
and threw him down forcefully, and all the Achaians cheered,
might come-he, Odysseus-in such strength among these suitors! Then they'd all get a swift end and a bitter marriage!
As regards the business you're enquiring about, I shan't veer off onto other subjects, nor will I mislead you-
of all that I heard from that forthright Old Man of the Sea
not one word will I keep back or conceal from you!
He said he'd seen Odysseus on an island, much frustrated, in the halls of the nymph Kalypso, who by constraint detains him there, so he can't get back to his own country:
for he has no ships with oars, nor any comrades
to further his voyage over the broad back of the sea.'
"So spoke Atreus' son, the famed spearman Menelaös.
When I'd done all this, I set out: the immortals gave me
a following wind, and a speedy voyage to my own country."
So he spoke, and stirred the heart in her breast with his words.
Then the godlike Theoklymenos also addressed them, saying: "Respected wife of Odysseus, son of Laërtes, truly
your son knows nothing for certain!! Listen rather to me, for I shall foretell the truth to you, hold back nothing!
Zeus, first of gods, be my witness, and this guest-friendly board,
and the hearth of peerless Odysseus, to which I have come, that Odysseus is already here, in his own homeland, sitting quiet or stealing about, learning of these misdeeds,
and planting the seeds of destruction for all the suitors:
such the bird portent I noted as I sat on the well-benched
ship of Telemachos here, and duly expounded to him."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"If only these words of yours, stranger, might be fulfilled!
Then would you quickly know friendship and gifts in plenty
from me, so that any who met you would call you blessed."
Such was the conversation they had with one another. Meanwhile, out in front of Odysseus' house, the suitors were amusing themselves by throwing discus and javelin
on the leveled terrace as always, in their arrogance. But when
the time for dinner arrived, and the flocks were coming home
from the fields on every side, led by their usual herdsmen,
then they were summoned by Medon-who pleased them best of the heralds, and was present at their dinners-saying:
"Young men, now you've all pleasured your hearts with sport,
come on into the house, so we can get dinner ready,
for it's no bad thing to have meals at the proper time."
So he spoke, and they stood up and obeyed his summons. When they entered the pleasantly sited house they took off their cloaks and laid them down on the chairs and benches,
and set about slaughtering big sheep and fattened goats,
and plumped-up porkers, and a cow from the herd, as they made ready their meal.
Now Odysseus and the noble swineherd were preparing to leave the countryside, go in to town;
and the swineherd, leader of men, spoke first, declaring:
"Stranger, since you're so eager to go off into the city
today, as my master commanded-though I myself
would rather have left you here to watch over the farmstead- nevertheless I respect him, and fear that he might
reprimand me later, and a master's rebukes can be harsh-
come on now, let's be going: the day is nearly over, it will soon be evening, and a little too cold for you."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to him, saying: "Noted and understood. You're spelling it out for the wise.
But yes, let's be going. Be my guide all the way. And give me-
if there's one around that's been cut for your use-a strong staff to support me. You said the road was uneven."
With that he slung over his shoulder his worn-out leather bag, tattered and rent, which was held by a twisted cord,
and Eumaios gave him a staff that was to his liking,
and the two set out. Dogs and herdsmen were left behind
to look after the farmstead, while the swineherd led his master into town, in the guise of a miserable aged beggar
propped on a staff, wearing mean and threadbare clothes.
But when, as they made their way along the stony path,
they'd come close to the city, and had reached a spring, from which,
paved and fair-flowing, the townsfolk got their water- developed by Ithakos, Neritos, and Polyktor,
with a grove of black waterside poplars that encircled it on every side, and the chill water came flowing down
from the rocks above, and up high there was built an altar
to the nymphs, where all travelers made offerings-there Melanthios son of Dolios overtook them while driving those she-goats that were the very best from all his herds for the suitors' dinner; two herdsmen accompanied him.
When he saw them, he reviled them, addressing them personally
in aggressive, unseemly terms, that enraged Odysseus' heart: "Now here comes a total no-good leading a no-good! As usual, the god's bringing like and like together! Where, pray,
you wretched swineherd, are you taking this old bald pig,
this tiresome beggar, this walking blot on our feasts?
He'll stand and rub his shoulders at many doorposts, begging for scraps, but never for swords or cauldrons! If you gave me this dolt to be a guard on my farmstead,
to sweep out the pens and fetch green shoots for the kids,
then by drinking whey he could build up his thigh muscles!
But since all he's learned is bad stuff, he won't be willing to do real work-he'd rather slouch his way through this district begging, to feed his bottomless belly!
I'll tell you one thing straight, that will certainly come to pass:
if he hangs around the residence of godlike Odysseus, then
there'll be plenty of footstools shied by men at his head
that his ribs will splinter as he's pelted throughout the house."
So he spoke. As he passed, in his folly he kicked Odysseus on the hip, yet failed to knock him clear of the path.
Odysseus stood there unshaken, pondering whether
he should attack with his staff, and beat the life out of him, or collar him by the waist, dash his head on the ground.
But he steeled himself, and endured. The swineherd stared in rebuke at this fellow, raised his arms, and prayed aloud:
"You nymphs of the spring, Zeus' daughters, if Odysseus
ever burned thigh pieces for you, wrapped in rich fat,
of lambs or kids, then grant me fulfillment of this prayer: may that man, my master, return, and divinity guide him!
Then would he scatter all those glorious airs that you
flaunt in your arrogance now, always strutting around
this township, while useless herdsmen bring the flocks to ruin."
The goatherd Melanthios responded to him, saying: "My oh my, how this dog rants, mind full of malice!
One day I'll carry him off in a well-benched black ship,
far away from Itháke, where he might bring me a fortune.
Oh, I wish silver-bowed Apollo would strike down Telemachos today in his halls, or the suitors would kill him, as surely
as for Odysseus, far off, the day of return's been lost."
So saying, he left them behind there, as they walked slowly on,
while he moved fast, and soon reached his master's house.
He went straight in, and sat down among the suitors, facing Eurymachos, the friend whom he liked the best.
The carvers set before him a portion of roast meat, while the respected housekeeper brought him bread, and placed it
ready to eat. Now Odysseus and the noble swineherd
stopped when they got near; about them rang the notes
of the hollow lyre, for Phemios was preparing to sing for them. Then Odysseus clutched the swineherd's hand, and said: "Eumaios, surely this is Odysseus' fine house? It's easily
distinguishable from the rest, even when there are many.
One building's linked to another, and the courtyard's fitted with wall and copestones, its doors are finely worked
and double-paneled: no man could furnish it better. And I observe that within there's a feast for many in progress,
for the smell of roast meat rises from it, and within it echoes
the lyre, made by the gods an accompaniment to feasting."
To him then, swineherd Eumaios, you then responded, saying: "Easily did you know it, for in all else you don't lack sense.
But now we have to think how we shall act next.
You could go first into this pleasantly sited house,
and mix with the suitors, while I stay out here. Or else, if you like, you stay here, and I'll go in before you.
But don't linger outside too long, or someone might notice, and hit you or chase you off. Do please be careful."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Noted and understood. You're spelling it out for the wise. You go on ahead, and I'll stay behind out here-
I'm not unused to being hit, or having things thrown at me.
My spirit is steadfast, for I've suffered many setbacks
from rough seas and in war: let this be added to them!
But a ravening belly there's no way of concealing-
an accursed plague, that brings many evils upon mankind. For its sake, too, well-benched ships are armed and sent out on the unharvested sea, bearing ills to their enemies."
Such was the conversation they had with one another.
Now a dog lying there raised its head and pricked up its ears- Argos, stout-hearted Odysseus' dog, that he, years ago,
had bred up himself, but got no joy of, departing too soon for sacred Ilion. Young hunters used to take Argos
to go in pursuit of wild goats, or deer, or hares; but now he lay neglected, his master long since absent,
in the abundant dung of the mules and oxen left outside the gates, until the servants of Odysseus carted it off to manure his widespread estate. There lay
the dog Argos now, his body crawling with dog ticks.
But the moment he sensed that it was Odysseus nearby he wagged his tail and laid back both ears, and yet
no longer had the strength to move any closer to
his master, who now looked away, and wiped off a tear
that he easily hid from Eumaios, then questioned him, saying:
"Eumaios, it's odd, this dog lying here in the dung- he has a good body, but I still can't really be certain
if he once had the speed to match his fine appearance, or was nothing more than one of those table dogs
that their masters take care of only to put on a show."
To him, swineherd Eumaios, you then responded, saying: "This is indeed the dog of a man who died far away.
If he were such today, in body and performance,
as he was when Odysseus left him, and set out for Troy,
you'd at once be astonished on seeing his speed and strength!
No wild beast that he started in the thick woodland's depths ever escaped him. He was also a keen-nosed tracker.
But now he's in a poor way, and his master has perished far from his homeland. The women are heedless, can't be
bothered
to care for him. Servants no longer directed by their master
won't perform their duties properly any more,
for far-seeing Zeus strips away half the proper worth from any man, once the day of slavery overtakes him."
So saying, he went on into the pleasantly sited building
and made straight for the hall to join the noble suitors.
But Argos the fated lot of black death overwhelmed once he'd seen Odysseus again, in the twentieth year.
Godlike Telemachos was the first by far to notice
the swineherd advancing through the house, and at once
invited him with a nod. Eumaios looked round and seized
a nearby stool, on which the carver would sit to cut all the portions of meat for the suitors feasting there
in the hall. This he took and placed at Telemachos' table, opposite him, and sat down himself. A herald now set
a portion of meat before him, with bread from a basket.
Very soon after him Odysseus entered the building as he was, in the guise of a miserable aged beggar
propped on a staff, wearing mean and threadbare clothes. He sat down on the ash-wood threshold inside the doorway,
leaning back on the doorpost of cypress, which long ago
a craftsman had skillfully planed and made true to the line. Telemachos now beckoned the swineherd over to him, took a whole loaf from the exquisite basket, together
with all the meat he could pick up in both hands, and said:
"Take this, a gift for the stranger. Tell him he should himself
go round among all the suitors, begging. Embarrassed restraint is not a useful emotion for a man who's in need."
So he spoke; the swineherd, on hearing his order, went up to Odysseus,
and standing close, addressed him with winged words, saying:
"Stranger, Telemachos gives you this, says you should
go round among all the suitors, begging. Embarrassed restraint is not a useful emotion, he says, for a man who begs."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to him, saying: "Zeus, lord, grant that Telemachos prosper among his peers,
and may all that his heart desires be accomplished for him."
With that he received the food in both hands and laid it down at his feet on his tattered old leather bag and ate while the minstrel was still performing there in the hall.
But when he'd eaten dinner, and the divine minstrel was done,
the suitors' noisy clamor resumed in the hall. Now Athene,
standing close beside Odysseus, Laërtes son, urged him on,to go round among the suitors, collect his crusts of bread,
discover which were right-thinking, which lawless. Yet even so she'd no plan to save a single one of them from destruction.
Off he went to beg of them, moving from left to right,
with outstretched hand all round, as though he'd long been at it. They felt pity, and gave, and regarded him with wonder, questioning who he might be, and where he came from.
The goatherd Melanthios now addressed them, saying:
"Listen to me, you suitors of our illustrious queen!
About this stranger: I've actually seen him before-in fact it was the swineherd who brought him back here, but I don't know the man himself, or who he claims as family."
So he spoke. Antinoös then chastised the swineherd, saying:
"You infamous swineherd, why did you bring this fellow
here into town? Don't we have enough vagrants already, these tiresome beggars who disrupt our feasts? Is it not enough for you that such men should cluster here and guzzle our lord's livelihood, that you bring in this fellow too?"
To him, swineherd Eumaios, you then responded, saying:
"High-born you may be, Antinoös, but that was not well said.
For who'd himself seek out and invite any stranger
from abroad, except maybe some kind of public worker- a prophet, a healer of sickness, a carpenter-even a godlike
minstrel, who gives delight with his singing? Such men
are invited worldwide on mankind's boundless earth,
but no man would bring in a beggar to devour his substance! You're always too severe, more than the rest of the suitors,
on Odysseus' servants, on me above all-although
I don't care, so long as prudent Penelope and godlike Telemachos are here, both still living in these halls."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Silence! Never waste words in answering this man!
Antinoös has an old habit of meanly provoking people
with his rough language, and urges others to do the same."
That said, he addressed Antinoös with winged words, saying: "Antinoös, truly you care for me like a father his son, the way
you tell me to drive this stranger away from our halls with words of enforcement! May no god bring this about! Take something,
and give it him! Far from begrudging you, I command it!
Don't worry about my mother, or the rest of the household servants resident here in the house of godlike Odysseus!
But in fact this isn't the kind of thought in your breast: you'd far rather eat yourself than give to somebody else."
To him then in turn Antinoös responded: "Telemachos,
high-flown speaker, in anger unbridled, what's this you said?
If all the suitors would offer him just what I do, then
for three months this house would keep him at a distance!"
So saying, he seized and brought out from beneath the table
the footstool on which he rested his sleek feet while feasting.
The others, more generous, filled Odysseus' old bag with crusts and meat. Now Odysseus was on his way
back to the entrance, after making free trial of the Achaians, but he stopped by Antinoös, and said to him: "Give, friend!
You don't look to me like the meanest of the Achaians,
but rather the noblest, for you have the air of a king!
So it's right that you should give me an even larger portion of food than the rest, and I'd spread your fame worldwide!
For I too once dwelt in my own rich house among other
prosperous men, and I often would give to a vagrant,
no matter what sort he was or what he might be lacking! Countless servants I had, and much else in abundance owning which men live well, and are known as wealthy.
But Kronos' son Zeus lost me all-on some whim, I suppose-
by inciting me to go off, with a bunch of roving pirates
to Egypt-a lengthy voyage-and meet my ruin there. Well, in the river of Egypt I anchored my curved vessels. Then I issued orders to my trusty comrades, to stay there with the ships, and to be those ships' protectors
while I sent off scouts to find and man lookout posts.
But, trusting their strength, they yielded to wanton aggression,
and at once began ravaging the Egyptians' splendid fields, carrying off their wives and their little children,
and killing the men. Word quickly reached the city,
and, hearing the shouting, people came out at daybreak.
The whole plain filled up with infantry and horses
and the bright glint of bronze. Zeus, hurler of thunderbolts, cast a craven panic upon my comrades: nobody dared
to stand firm and face the foe, for trouble confronted us
on every side. Many of us they slew with the sharp bronze;
others they led off alive, to do forced labor for them.
But me they sent on to Cyprus with a chance-met stranger, Dmetor, Iasos' son, a powerful Cypriot prince.
From there I've come here, with much hardship on the way."
To him Antinoös then responded, saying: "What god
has delivered this nuisance, this spoiler of feasts, to us? You, keep your distance, stand well away from my table, or you'll soon find yourself in a bitter Egypt and Cyprus, the right place for the bold and shameless beggar you are!
You make your pitch to each man in turn, and they give
thoughtlessly, since there's no restraint and no compunction in handing out other men's stuff, and everyone has so much."
At this resourceful Odysseus took a step back, and said: "I see your mind's no match for your looks! You wouldn't
spare even salt from your home store for your own suppliant,
and though at another man's table, you're still reluctant
to break off a crust and give it me! Yet there's plenty here."
So he spoke, and Antinoös grew yet more enraged at heart. Staring angrily, he addressed him with winged words, saying:
"Indeed, you'll no longer get safely back, I think,
out through this hall, now you're bandying insults too."
So saying, he threw the footstool, struck Odysseus' right shoulder at the base, where it joins the back; but he stood rock firm.
Antinoös' missile failed to floor him. He said nothing,
just shook his head, mind deeply pondering trouble. Then
he made his way back to the threshold and seated himself,
and set down his well-filled bag, and addressed the suitors, saying: "Listen to me, you suitors of the illustrious queen,
to what the heart in my breast now urges me to tell you!
There's no pain felt by the mind, nor any sorrow, when
a man takes a hit who's fighting to save his own possessions- cattle, maybe, or flocks of white sheep-but Antinoös
struck me because of my wretched belly, that damnable plague, the source of so much trouble for mankind!
If beggars have their own gods or Furies, then may death's
end find Antinoös before ever he comes to marriage!"
Then Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, responded to him, saying: "Sit still and eat quietly, stranger, or go off somewhere else,
or the young men may seize you, by hand or foot, for the way
you talk, and tear you apart, and throw you out of the house."
So he spoke, indignant and headstrong, but they all rebuked him, and thus would one of these overproud youths address him: "Antinoös, you did wrong to strike this luckless vagrant!
If he turns out to be some god from heaven, you're done for!
And the gods do assume the form of some stranger from afar,
take on any shape, to wander through our cities
observing both good governance and its violent transgressions."
So spoke the suitors; but he paid no heed to their words, and Telemachos nursed great sorrow at heart because
of the blow to his father, yet shed no tear on the ground but just shook his head, mind deeply pondering trouble.
When prudent Penelope was informed about the assault
on the man in the hall, she exclaimed, among her handmaids: "May Apollo, renowned archer, so strike you yourself!"
To her then responded Eurynome, the housekeeper, saying: "Would that our prayers might find fulfillment! Then not
one of these men would live till another fine-throned Dawn."
Prudent Penelope replied to her, saying: "Good mother, they're all our enemies, since they're plotting trouble for us;
but Antinoös is the worst, he's like black death!
Some luckless stranger's been going round in the house begging from all the men, driven to it by poverty.
All the rest gave him enough to fill his bag, but this man
threw a footstool and struck him, low down on his right shoulder."
Such her words while she sat in her room, conversing
with her handmaids, and noble Odysseus was eating his scraps.
Then she sent for the noble swineherd, and addressed him, saying: "Go now, noble Eumaios, invite this stranger here:
I'd like to show him some kindness-and ask him if perhaps
he's had has some news of steadfast-minded Odysseus,
or has actually seen him: he seems to be widely traveled." Then to her, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"Indeed, my queen, I could wish these Achaians would be silent, he spins such a tale as would enchant your very soul!
Three nights I had him with me, and three days I kept him
in my hut-he first came to me after he jumped ship,
but that wasn't the end of the tale of hardship he told me. Like the man gazing rapt at a minstrel performing lays that he's learned from the gods for the entrancement of mortals,
who are ceaselessly eager to hear him, whenever he sings-
that's how this fellow charmed me as he sat in my home. He says he's a family guest-friend of Odysseus, and dwells in Krete, that place where the line of Minos holds sway.
Now he's come here from there, with much hardship on the way, wandering ever onward. He's had news of Odysseus, he says:
quite near, in the Thesprotians' rich terrain, alive,
and bringing much treasure back with him to his home."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Go, summon him! He can tell me all this, face to face.
As for these men sitting outside or here indoors, enjoying
a good time, let them go on, since that's their fancy!
Their own possessions, bread and sweet wine, are left untouched in their homes, and are eaten by their servants, while they themselves, day in day out, flock to our house,
slaughter our cattle and sheep and fatted goats, hold feasts
at which they swill down our bright red wine without any restraint. Most is gone now, for there is no man here such as Odysseus once was, to keep ruin from our house.
But were Odysseus to come back home, then he and his son
would at once exact vengeance for these men's violent acts."
So she spoke. Telemachos now sneezed, loudly. The whole house echoed ringingly round them. Penelope laughed, and at once addressed Eumaios with winged words, saying:
"Please go now and bring the stranger here before me!
Don't you see how my son just sneezed at everything I said?
It follows that death shall not be unfulfilled for the suitors- to the last man: not one shall escape death and the fates.
And another thing I will tell you, and you take it to heart: If I find that in all he relates he speaks only truth,
then I'll dress him in mantle and tunic, the very best there are."
So she spoke. The swineherd went, on hearing her words,
to Odysseus, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Stranger, father, prudent Penelope wants to see you-
Telemachos' mother: her heart bids her make enquiries
about her husband, although she's suffered much already.
If she finds that in all you relate you speak only truth,
then she'll dress you in mantle and tunic-things of which you stand much in need! As for food, go beg through the land to keep your belly well fed: those who so choose will give."
Much-enduring noble Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"In a moment, Eumaios, I'll be relating the whole truth
to Ikarios' daughter, the prudent Penelope! My knowledge of Odysseus is sound, and we've borne like hardships. But I'm much afraid of this crowd of dangerous suitors,
whose aggression and violence reach up to the iron heaven!
For just now, as I went through the hall, doing no harm, this man struck me, causing much pain, yet neither Telemachos nor anyone else came out to protect me.
So tell Penelope she must wait in the halls, however
impatient she may be, until the sun goes down:
then let her ask me about the day of her husband's return, and give me a seat that's nearer the fire, since my clothes
are threadbare. You know this yourself: I appealed to you first."
So he spoke. The swineherd then, after hearing his words,
went back in. Penelope at once addressed him, saying:
"You haven't brought him, Eumaios! What's this vagrant up to? Is he scared without reason of someone, or maybe embarrassed here in the house? Embarrassment makes a useless beggar."
To her then, swineherd Eumaios, you responded, saying:
"What he says is well chosen, as anyone else would agree:
he hopes to avoid the violence of these arrogant men,
so he wants you to wait to see him until the sun goes down. For yourself too, my queen, it would indeed be far better to speak with the stranger, and hear what he says, alone."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"This stranger's not witless: he figures how things may go.
For there may well be no other mortal men alive
who in their violence contrive such reckless acts as these."
So she spoke, and the noble swineherd then departed and joined the throng of the suitors after he'd told her all.
At once he addressed winged words to Telemachos, head held close, so that nobody else could hear him, saying: "Friend, I'm off out there now to guard the pigs and the rest- your and my livelihood. You take charge of everything here.
Above all, keep yourself safe, take good care you don't run
into trouble: many Achaians now have it in for you- may Zeus destroy them utterly before harm can befall us!"
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying:
"Old fellow, so it shall be. Off you go when you've had some food. But come back tomorrow with fine sacrificial victims!
All here will be cared for by me. And by the immortals."
So he spoke. The swineherd sat down again on a polished chair, and when he'd satisfied his desire for food and drink, he went back to his pigs, leaving the courts and the hall
full of banqueters. Now they began to enjoy themselves with
dancing and singing, for already the evening had arrived.


BOOK 18

Now there came up a public beggar, whose custom it was to beg through the town of Itháke, well known for his ravenous belly, forever guzzling and swilling. There was no strength in him, nor force; yet his great bulk made an imposing sight.
His name was Arnaios: this his lady mother had given him
at birth. But Iros was his nickname with all the young men because he used to run errands for anyone who would ask him.Up he came now, bent on chasing Odysseus away
from his own home, and began, with winged words, to upbraid him:
"Out of this entrance, old man, before someone drags you off
by the foot! Don't you see how everyone's winking at me, encouraging me to drag you? Yet I'm ashamed to do it.
So up with you now, or our quarrel will soon come to fisticuffs!"
With an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus responded, saying:
"Sir, neither by words nor by action am I causing you harm,
nor do I resent someone treating you-however large the helping!
This threshold has room for us both, nor is there need for you to be jealous of others. It seems to me you're a vagrant
as I am. Prosperity is something the gods will allot. But don't
provoke me too much with your fists, lest you rouse my wrath,
and, old man though I am, I spatter your breast and lips
with your blood! Then I'd enjoy much greater peace and quiet tomorrow, since I don't think you'd then come back
a second time to the hall of Laërtes' son Odysseus."
Now Iros the vagrant grew angry, and addressed him, saying:
"Oh my, how glibly this bald old pig rants on,
like some crone by the oven! But I'll contrive trouble for him, punch him out with both hands, scatter all the teeth
from his jaws on the ground, as I'd treat a crop-rooting sow!
Come, gird yourself now, let all these men get to watch us
fighting! Yet how could you ever stand up to a younger man?"
So these two, there in front of the lofty doorway
on the polished threshold were taunting each other sharply; Antinoös, princely in power, now noticed them at it,
and, with a light laugh, addressed the suitors, saying:
"Never before, my friends, has anything happened to match the sport that some god's brought to this house! The stranger and Iros are challenging one another to a fistfight!
so gather round quickly, let's make a real match of it!"
So he spoke. They all sprang to their feet, with laughter,
and crowded about this couple of tatterdemalion beggars. Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, then addressed them, saying: "Listen, all you proud suitors, to what I have to say!
These goats' paunches over the fire, set there for our supper,
that we filled first with fat and blood-let whichever of these two
emerges victorious, proves himself the better man, stand up and take for himself the one that he chooses.
What's more, he shall always feast with us, nor will we allow any other beggar to join us or to beg among us."
So Antinoös spoke: what he said was to their liking.
Then with crafty intent resourceful Odysseus declared: "Friends, there's no way an old man worn out by grief can fight with a younger opponent; and yet my belly, that worker of evil, urges me to succumb to his attacks!
But come now, all of you swear me a mighty oath
that no one, backing Iros, will strike me a foul blow
in reckless mood, and use force to let this fellow beat me."
So he spoke, and they all swore the oath as he requested.
But when they'd sworn, and completed the oath-taking, then Telemachos, princely in power, addressed them once more, saying:
"Stranger, if your heart and proud spirit are urging you to beat off this man, have no fear of any other Achaian: any man who strikes you will be up against many more! I myself am your host, accepted by these two princes,
Antinoös and Eurymachos, sagacious men both of them."
So he spoke, and they all applauded. And now Odysseus girded his rags about his loins, revealing his thighs,
both muscled and large, and his broad shoulders appeared, and his chest and his powerful forearms. Also Athene
came close and magnified the limbs of the people's shepherd,
so that even the suitors condescendingly admired them,
and thus would one of them speak, with a glance at his neighbor: "Soon will Iros, un-Irosed, have a loss of his own making,
so muscled a thigh does the old man reveal beneath his rags."
So he spoke, and Iros' spirit was severely shaken.
Yet even so the serving men made him gird up his rags
and forced him out, terrified, the flesh shivering on his limbs. Then Antinoös addressed a scathing rebuke to him, saying: "Better for you, you braggart, had you never been born
if you tremble in front of this man and are so afraid of him-
someone so old, so broken by the hardship he's suffered! I'll tell you this straight out, and it'll happen for sure:
if he's victorious, proves himself the better man,
I'll clap you in a black ship, send you off to the mainland, to King Echetos, dangerous maimer of all mortal men alive,
who'll cut off your nose and ears with the pitiless bronze, and rip out your privates, give them raw to the dogs to eat."
So he spoke, and yet greater trembling seized on Iros' limbs
as they led him out to the middle. Both men put up their hands. Much-enduring noble Odysseus was debating in his mind
whether to slam him so hard that life left him as he fell,
or hit him just hard enough to stretch him out on the ground; and as he reflected, it struck him that this was the better course: to hit him lightly, and not arouse Achaian suspicions.
So after they raised their hands Iros led to the right shoulder,
but Odysseus struck his neck beneath the ear. The blow
crushed in the bones. At once red blood filled his mouth, he fell in the dust with a cry, and gnashed his teeth,
and drummed on the ground with his feet. The lordly suitors,
arms raised, nearly died laughing. And then Odysseus
dragged him out by his foot through the doorway to the courtyard and the gates of the colonnade. There he propped him sitting against the courtyard wall, thrust a staff into his hand,
and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Now sit there,
to scare off the pigs and dogs! And stop pretending
to lord it over strangers and beggars, you wretch,
or you may well bring a yet worse disaster upon you!"
With that he slung over his shoulder his worn-out leather bag, tattered and rent, which was held by a twisted cord,
and went back to the threshold and sat there. The suitors
came inside laughing gaily, and congratulated him, saying: "May Zeus and the other gods, stranger, grant you all
that you most desire, the dearest wish of your heart,
for you've ended the begging routine of this insatiable fellow
in our neighborhood! Soon we'll send him across to the mainland
to King Echetos, dangerous maimer of all mortal men alive!"
So they spoke, and Odysseus rejoiced at the words of omen,and Antinoös set before him the great paunch, filled
with fat and blood, while Amphinomos chose two loaves,
took them out of the basket, and set these too before him,
and pledged him, holding a golden cup, and addressed him, saying: "Your health, father and stranger: may prosperity hereafter
attend you, though now you're beset by many troubles."
To him resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying:
"Amphinomos, you strike me as a highly sagacious man,
such a one as your father was, whose reputation I knew of:
Doulichian Nisos, a man both valiant and wealthy.
They say you're his son: you seem a well-mannered person, so I've something to tell you: please listen and pay attention.
This earth nurtures nothing of less account than man
among all creatures that breathe and move upon it;
for he thinks he'll not suffer setbacks in the years ahead
so long as the gods grant him prowess and his knees are nimble; and when the blessed gods bring him hard times, this too,
though against his will, he endures with a stubborn heart,
for the spirit of men on this earth will meet and match the day that the Father of gods and men brings on them.
I too was once on the way to a good life among my fellows, but, yielding to strength and violence, did many reckless deeds,
because I trusted my father and the rest of my kinsmen.
So no man should ever use lawlessness, on any occasion, but accept in silence those gifts that the gods may give him. Such reckless acts I now witness the suitors committing,
as they squander the goods and show no respect for the wife
of a man who, I tell you, won't be absent much longer
from his friends and country-he's close! May some god rather lead you home out of here, so you don't encounter him
when he's back in his native setting, for not bloodless, I think, will be the final reckoning between that man and the suitors,
once he's made it home and is under his own roof."
So saying, he poured a libation, and drank the honey-sweet wine, and then returned the cup to the commander of the people.
But Amphinomos went through the hall deeply worried at heart, head bowed, for his spirit clearly foresaw disaster.
Yet he still failed to dodge his fate, since Athene bound him
to be violently overwhelmed by Telemachos' hands and spear. Now he sat down again in the chair from which he'd risen.
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, put a thought in the mind of Ikarios' daughter, the prudent Penelope: that she
should appear now before the suitors, flutter their hearts
to the utmost, and thus win still greater appreciation
from her husband and son than they'd accorded her hitherto. With an awkward laugh, she addressed her housekeeper, saying: "Eurynome, I'm now minded, as I've never been before,
to show myself to the suitors, hateful though I still find them.
And I want a word with my son, to tell him he'd do better not to consort so much with these overweening suitors, who treat him politely, but are plotting his downfall later."
Then Eurynome, housekeeper, responded to her, saying:
"All this indeed, child, was well and properly spoken.
Go now, have a word with your son, don't hold it back! But wash yourself first, and rub oil into your cheeks- don't go as you are, leaving your face all tear-stained:
avoid indiscriminate mourning, day in day out! Your son
has now attained the age that you begged the immortals most
to allow you to see: he's become a bearded adult."
To her then prudent Penelope now responded, saying: "Eurynome, don't, though you care for me, try to talk me into washing my body or massaging myself with oil!
Any beauty I once had the gods, who possess Olympos,
destroyed, from the day when he left with the hollow ships! But go tell Autonoë now, along with Hippodameia,
to come here: I want them beside me in the hall.
I won't go in to the men alone: I'd be ashamed to."
So she spoke, and out through the hall the old woman went
to take these handmaids the message, request their presence.
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another idea: on Ikarios' daughter she shed sweet sleep: she lay back
and dozed, there in her recliner; all her joints were relaxed.
While she slept, Athene, bright among goddesses, gave her ambrosial gifts, to make her seem wondrous to the Achaians.
To begin with she cleansed her fine features with ambrosial beauty, a salvesuch as that which fair-garlanded Kythereiaemploys when she goes to join the Graces' delightful dance;
and she rendered her taller and fuller in appearance, and of whiter complexion than freshly sawn ivory. When
she'd done all this, she, the bright goddess, went on her way,
and the white-armed handmaids then approached from the hall, chatting loudly, so that sweet sleep let Penelope go,
and she sat up, rubbing her cheeks, and said to herself:
"In the depth of my misery soft oblivion stilled my senses!
How I wish that chaste Artemis would give me so soft a death here and now, that I might no longer with heartfelt lamentation waste my life away, ever yearning for the unrivaled virtues
of my dear husband, a man without peer among the Achaians."
So saying, she went down from her bright upper chamber- not alone, for the two handmaids followed in attendance. When she, bright among women, came where the suitors were, she stood by the central post of the snugly timbered roof,
holding up her shining veil in front of her face
and flanked on either side by a devoted handmaid.
At once the men's knees were weakened, their hearts inflamed by passion: each one of them prayed he might share her bed. But she now addressed Telemachos, her dear son, saying:
"Your mind-set and thinking, Telemachos, have got unbalanced!
When you were still a child, you had more common sense! But now you're grown, and are on the verge of manhood- and outsiders, seeing only your stature and good looks,
would certainly think you the offspring of a successful man-
your mind and thinking no longer are on the proper track!
Look at this business that just took place in our hall, the way you let this stranger be so badly mistreated!
And what if this same stranger, while sitting here in our house, were to suffer real hurt from such grievous brutality? You
would then bear the burden of public shame and disgrace!"
Sagacious Telemachos now responded to her, saying: "My mother, I cannot reprove you for becoming angry:
I myself now see and recognize all these things in my heart,
both the good and the worse, though before I thought as a child.
Yet I can't work out everything with sagacity, because
they drive me crazy, these men sitting all around me cogitating their wicked schemes, while I have none to aid me.
Still, the contest between the stranger and Iros didn't go
as the suitors expected: the stranger turned out a better fighter.
How I wish-by Zeus the Father, by Athene and Apollo!-
that these suitors were likewise now beaten, here in our home, heads lolling, some of them out there in the courtyard,
others inside the house, and the knees of all were unstrung, as now that lout Iros sits at the entrance to the courtyard,
head lolling, his appearance much like that of a drunk,
unable to stand on his feet or to make his way home
to wherever he lives, since his limbs are quite unstrung."
Such was their conversation, the one with the other;
and Eurymachos now addressed himself to Penelope, saying:
"Ikarios' daughter, most prudent Penelope: could all
the Achaians throughout Iasian Argos see you now, still more suitors would be feasting here in your halls from early tomorrow, since you excel all other women
in beauty and stature-and indeed in your sensible mind."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Eurymachos, any excellence of beauty and figure I had
the immortals destroyed at the time the Argives embarked for Ilion, and among them went my husband, Odysseus. Were he only to come back now, and give comfort to my life,
greater would be my renown, and finer too; but now
I grieve, so many sorrows has some god laid upon me.
Indeed, when he was leaving his native land, did he not
clasp my right hand at the wrist, and then address me, saying: 'My wife, since I don't imagine that the well-greaved Achaians
will all return safe and unscathed from the land of Troy-
for the Trojans, they say, are most redoubtable warriors,
as both spearmen and archers, and also as skillful charioteers driving swift-footed horses, such men as can most quickly decide who'll win the great contest of leveling warfare-
I don't know whether the god will bring me back, or if
I'll die out at Troy: the care of all here must rest with you. Look after my mother and father at home as you do now, or with even closer attention, while I'm far away;
but if the day comes when you see our son grown and bearded,
then wed the man of your choice, and leave this house.'
"So he spoke,
and now all this is being brought about. A night
will come when some hateful marriage will be the lot
of my unblest self, whom Zeus has deprived of comfort.
But in this matter sore grief has come on my heart and spirit, for this was never the way that suitors wooed in the past,
when men wanting to court a fine lady and rich man's daughter would all be in competition with one another, themselves bringing along fat flocks and cows to provide a banquet
for the bride's friends and family, and giving her splendid gifts- not devouring the substance of others, with no payment."
So she spoke, and noble much-enduring Odysseus rejoiced because she coaxed gifts from these men, and charmed their hearts
with sweet words, while her mind was set on quite different things.
Then Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, once more addressed her, saying: "Ikarios' daughter, most prudent Penelope, presents-such as
any one of the Achaians might bring for you here-you should accept, for it's never polite to refuse a gift! But we
shall depart neither back to our holdings nor anywhere else until you marry the man who's the best of the Achaians."
So Antinoös spoke. What he said was to their liking, and each man sent off a herald to fetch his presents.
A large and exquisite robe was what came for Antinoös, finely embroidered: attached to it were a dozen brooches, all of gold, and each fitted with smoothly rounded clasps.
There soon arrived for Eurymachos an elaborate golden
chain, strung with amber beads, as bright as sunlight. Eurydamas' servants brought him a pair of earrings, with triple clustering pendants: much grace shone from them.
From the house of the lord Peisandros, Polyktor's son,
his servant now brought a necklace, an exquisite ornament.
Thus every Achaian provided some kind of lovely gift.
But she, bright among women, went back to her upper room, while her handmaids accepted these beautiful presents for her.
The men now turned their attention to the dance and delightful song for their pleasure, awaiting the arrival of evening; and while
they were still enjoying themselves, dark evening came on.
Then at once they set up three braziers in the hall
to give them light, and piled seasoned firewood round them, dried out long since and sapless, newly split with the bronze, and set torches between them. The maids of steadfast-minded
Odysseus took turns lighting them, and he himself, Zeus-born resourceful Odysseus, now spoke among them, saying:
"You maidservants of Odysseus, your long-absent lord,
go back now up to the chamber where your revered queen is,
ply your distaffs beside her-and keep her cheerful while
you're sitting there in her room-or card the wool
with your hands: I myself will make light for all these men,
and even if they're determined to stay up till well-throned Dawn they won't exhaust me, oh no: I'm a much-enduring fellow."
So he spoke. But the handmaids tittered, and glanced at each other,
and fair-cheeked Melantho reproved him in shameful wise- she whom Dolios sired, but Penelope raised and cherished like a daughter, and gave her all the toys she wanted.
Yet not even so did she share any part of Penelope's sorrow,
but was having sex with Eurymachos, was his regular lover.
She now upbraided Odysseus in censorious language, saying: "You miserable stranger, you must be clean out of your mind! You're not willing to go get your sleep in a smithy, or some public doss-house: oh no, you're busy speaking so boldly,
among all these gentlemen! Have you no proper respect?
Wine's surely fuddled your wits, or else your mind's always like this, you're forever spouting nonsense!
Are you above yourself after beating that vagrant Iros? Another man, better than Iros, may soon stand up against you,
beat you about the head with his powerful fists, befoul you
with streams of your own blood, and chase you from this house."
With an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus retorted, saying: "You bitch, I'll go straight to Telemachos, tell him the way you talk! Very likely he'll cut you up, there and then!"
So he spoke. His words sent the women scurrying off:
Away they went through the hall, the limbs of each one loosened beneath her by fear: they thought he'd do what he said.
But Odysseus stood by the flaming braziers, fed them,
one eye on the crowd of suitors, while in his mind he pondered
other matters, not destined to go without fulfillment.
But these haughty suitors Athene would not permit at all
to back off from distressing outrage: she wanted its pain to sink
deeper still into the heart of Laërtes' son Odysseus. Now Eurymachos, Polybos' son, began to address them,
making fun of Odysseus, arousing laughter in his comrades:
"Listen to me, all you suitors of our glorious queen, while I say what the heart in my breast impels me to tell you!
Not without the gods' will has this man reached Odysseus' home! The torchlight does indeed appear to emanate from him-
from his head, that is, which lacks the least trace of hair upon it."
With that he addressed Odysseus, the city-sacker, saying:
"Would you come and work for me, stranger, as a hired day-laborer, on my outlying estate-your pay would be adequate-
collecting stones for the field walls, and planting tall trees?
I'd provide you there with food the entire year through,
and keep you well clothed, and give you shoes for your feet.
But since all you've learnt are bad habits, you won't want to set yourself to hard work; no, you'd rather beg your way through the district, to keep your insatiate belly fed."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Eurymachos, how I wish we two might have a contest
in the season of spring, when the days are growing longer,
out in the meadow, and I had a well-curved scythe in my hands, and you another one like it, for us to make trial of our work,
going without food until evening, and the grass was thick!
Or again, I wish we had teams of oxen to drive-the best, big and tawny, both well fed on grass, both of an age, both equal in drawing power, and of no slight strength- in a four-acre field, the clods yielding to the plowshare:
then you'd see whether I could keep my furrows straight!
Or again, if the son of Kronos from somewhere brought an attack upon us today, and I had a shield and two spears
and a helmet made all of bronze, snug against my temples, then you'd see me out there among the foremost fighters,
and wouldn't abuse me in speeches because of my belly!
But you're so incredibly arrogant and rigid-minded-
I suppose you think you're a great and powerful fellow because those you consort with are mean and common?
If only Odysseus might come, and return to his own country,
then at once these doors, however wide, would be
all too narrow for your flight out through the entrance!"
So he spoke. Eurymachos flared up in wrath, stared at him
with an angry glance, then addressed him with winged words, saying: "You wretch, I'll soon punish you for the way you have of speaking
so boldly, among all these gentlemen! Have you no proper respect? Wine's surely fuddled your wits, or else your mind's
always like this, you're forever spouting nonsense!
Are you above yourself after beating that vagrant Iros?"
So saying, he snatched up a footstool; but Odysseus
ducked down at Doulichian Amphinomos' knees in reaction to Eurymachos, whose throw instead hit the wine bearer's
right hand, so that his pitcher fell to the ground with a clang, while he himself groaned, collapsed backward in the dust.
The suitors now burst into uproar throughout the shadowy halls,
and thus would one of them speak, with a glance at his neighbor:
"I wish this stranger had died somewhere else in his wanderings before he came here! Then he'd never have raised such a tumult!
But now we're at odds over beggars, there'll be no pleasure in our privileged feasting, since meaner ways prevail."
Telemachos, princely in power, also addressed them, saying:
"Foolish sirs, you are crazy! You no longer hide the effects
of your swilling and guzzling-some god must be stirring you up! You've feasted well: go home now, lie down and rest-of course when the mood takes you: I chase no person away!"
So he spoke. Every one of them bit his lip and marveled
at Telemachos because of his bold outspoken manner. But Amphinomos, illustrious son of Nisos, the lord Aretias' son, now addressed them, saying: "Friends,
in response to what has been fairly and justly spoken
no man should take offense, make a hostile retort!
Do not abuse this stranger, or any one of the servants now domiciled in the household of godlike Odysseus!
No, rather let's have the wine bearer pour drops in our cups so we can make libations, and then go home to rest,
leaving the stranger behind here in the halls of Odysseus
for Telemachos to look after: it's to his house that he's come."
So he spoke: what he said was acceptable to them all. Then a bowl was mixed up for them by the hero Moulios
from Doulichion, a herald and the squire of Amphinomos.
He gave it to all in due order: they made libations
to the blessed gods, and drank the honey-sweet wine.
Then, libations made, when they'd drunk all they'd a mind to, they all departed to rest, each man to his own home.


BOOK 19

So noble Odysseus was left behind, there in the hall, with Athene's aid contriving a plan to kill the suitors;
and now he addressed Telemachos with winged words, saying: "Telemachos, we must lay up all our weapons of war inside
and disarm the suitors with soothing words when they note
their absence and ask you questions about them. Say:
'I stored them away from the smoke, since they no longer look as they did when Odysseus left them on going off to Troy,
but are blackened with all the fire's breath that's got to them.
And there's a greater concern some god has put in my mind:
that when you're flushed with wine you may pick a quarrel among you and wound one another and so disgrace
your feast and your wooing: for iron of itself attracts a man.'"
So he spoke. Telemachos obeyed his own dear father,
and summoned his nurse Eurykleia, and addressed her, saying:
"Good mother, please keep the women confined to their quarters while I put away in the storeroom the weapons of my father- fine gear, left in the house uncared for, blackened with smoke ever since my father's departure, when I was still a child.
But now I want to store them out of reach of the fire's breath."
His dear nurse Eurykleia responded to him, saying:
"Indeed, child, I could wish you were always so concerned to take care of the house and to guard the possessions in it! But who, pray, will go get a light and carry it for you?
The maidservants would have done it, but you won't let them."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"This stranger here; for I'll permit no man to be idle
who gets my rations, however remote the place he's from."
So he spoke; but her answer remained unwinged,
and she barred the doors of the pleasantly sited halls.
Odysseus and his illustrious son now both set to work carrying in the helmets and the embossed shields,
the sharp-pointed spears; and before them Pallas Athene went holding a golden lamp that made resplendent light.
At once Telemachos spoke, and addressed his father, saying:
"Father, here's a great wonder that my eyes behold! Really, the walls of the hall and its elegant panels,
the roof beams of fir and the tall posts holding them up are glowing bright to my eyes, like a blazing fire!
Surely some god's in here, one of those who hold wide heaven."
Resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Hush! Keep this to yourself, and ask no questions! This is indeed the way of the gods who hold Olympos.
You go get your rest now: I shall stay here and provoke
more interest yet in the handmaids and your mother-
she'll weep, and question me about every detail."
So he spoke, and Telemachos now went out through the hall, lit by the flaring torches, to bed down in his room,
where he always retired when sweet sleep came upon him.
Now once more he lay down there, to await the bright Dawn,
while noble Odysseus was left behind, there in the hall, with Athene's aid contriving a plan to kill the suitors.
Now prudent Penelope came down from her chamber, in appearance like Artemis or golden Aphrodite,
and for her they set a chair by the fire, where she always sat,
inlaid with spirals of silver and ivory: this was the work
of the craftsman Ikmalios, who'd fashioned a stool for the feet that was part of the chair itself. A great fleece was spread on it.
On this, then, prudent Penelope sat, while her white-armed
handmaids came in from the women's hall, and began
to remove all the leftover food, as well as the tables,
and the cups from which these haughty men had been drinking; they threw out the ash from the braziers, heaped them up
with fresh firewood, to provide both light and warmth. And now Melantho began once again to scold Odysseus, saying:
"Stranger, are you still here? Are you going to annoy us
all night, prowling round the house, spying on the women? Get out of here, you wretch, be content with your supper,
or you'll soon be thrown out, and beaten with firebrands too!"
With an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus responded:
"Woman, why reprimand me in so resentful a spirit?
Is it because I'm dirty and wear mean clothes and go
begging my way through the neighborhood? It's need compels me. That's the way it is with beggars and vagabonds!
Yet I too once dwelt in my own rich house among other
prosperous men, and I often would give to a vagrant,
no matter what sort he was or what he arrived in need of ! Countless servants I had, and much else in abundance, owning which men live well and are known as wealthy.
But Kronos' son Zeus wrecked it all-on some whim, I guess.
So take good care, woman, lest one day you lose all
that beauty for which you stand out among the handmaids,
lest your mistress may come to dislike you, and treat you harshly, or Odysseus may return-there's still hope! But even if
he's actually dead, and will nevermore come back home,
yet already, thanks to Apollo,his son's such a man as himself-
Telemachos! He doesn't miss it if one of the serving women in the hall misbehaves-he's no longer the child he was."
So he spoke, and prudent Penelope heard what he said,
and rebuked the maidservant, addressed her directly, saying:
"Bold woman, impudent bitch, none of your gross misconduct
has escaped me-on your own head you'll wipe it off !Well did you know, since it was from me you heard it, that I wanted to question the stranger here in my halls
about my husband, for whom my grief is great and ceaseless."
With that she also addressed the housekeeper Eurynome, saying: ''Eurynome, bring a chair here, and spread a fleece upon it,
so the stranger may sit down now and tell me his story and also listen to me: I'm eager to question him."
So he spoke, and Eurynome at once went off and fetched
a polished chair, and threw a fleece over it. Then
much-enduring noble Odysseus seated himself, and prudent Penelope was the first to start their discussion, saying: "Stranger, I shall begin by asking you this question:
Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents?"
To her then resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Lady, no mortal on this boundless earth could ever
find fault with you: your fame goes up to the wide heaven, like that of some king, a blameless, god-fearing person
who reigns over many valiant men, and upholds
justice: one for whom the black soil bears in abundance both wheat and barley, the trees are heavy with fruit,
the flocks bring forth young in season, the sea yields fish,
all from his good leadership, and his people thrive under him.
So question me here in your house about anything else,
but don't ask me about my background or my native country, lest you fill my heart with yet more suffering as I
recall them; for I'm a man of deep grief. What's more, it's not right that I should sit in someone else's house
weeping and wailing: such uncurbed sorrow's a bad thing.
I don't want one of your handmaids, much less you yourself, saying I swim in tears since my mind's deep-sodden with wine."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Stranger, any excellence of beauty and figure I had
the immortals destroyed at the time the Argives embarked
for Ilion, and among them went my husband, Odysseus. Were he only to come back now, and give comfort to my life, greater would be my renown, and finer too; but now
I grieve, so many sorrows has some god laid upon me.
All the highborn leaders who lord it over the islands-
Doulichion and Same and forested Zákynthos, besides those who rule as princes in rugged Itháke-
all court me against my will, and squander my property. And so I pay no attention to strangers and suppliants,
or to heralds at all, who indeed are public officials,
but waste my own heart away in yearning for Odysseus. So these men urge my remarriage, while I spin my deceits.
First, some god put in my mind the idea of a great web in my halls: so I set up a big loom, and started weaving-
broad was the web, fine of thread-then addressed them, saying:
'You young men, my suitors now noble Odysseus is dead, be patient, though eager to wed me, until I finish
this web: I should not want my woven work to be wasted- a shroud for the hero Laërtes, against that day
when the grim fate of pitiless death shall overtake him:
then the local Achaian women won't be able to blame me
for a man who'd won so much being left with no winding-sheet.'
"So I spoke; and the manly spirit was persuaded within them. From then on, day after day, I'd weave at the great loom,
but at night I'd have torches set up, and undo my work.
"Thus for three years I convinced, and deceived, the Achaians; but when the fourth year arrived, and the seasons came round, and the months wore away, and day after day passed by,
then it was that, told by my handmaids, the uncaring bitches,
they stole up on me and caught me, reproached me loudly.
So against my will I was made to finish the job, perforce; and now I can neither avoid this marriage, nor find
any other way of escape. My parents keep urging me
to get wed, my son frets as these men consume our estate-
something he understands, for now he's a man, well able
to look after a household to which Zeus still grants honor! Yet even so tell me your family, where you come from- you're not sprung from the oak of legend, nor from a rock!"
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"Respected wife of Odysseus, son of Laërtes,
will you never quit questioning me about my background? I'll tell you, then; though you'll give me over to yet more griefs than I have already-but that's the way of it,
when a man's been absent from home as long as I have,
a vagrant who's suffered much on the road from city to city.
Nevertheless I'll answer your questions and enquiries!
There's a country called Krete out in the wine-dark deep,
fine, rich-soiled, and sea-girt; it has in it many people,
so many they're countless: they have ninety cities,
and various tongues, one mixed with another-Achaians,
proud native Kretans, Kydonians, all are established there,
with Dorians in three settlements, and noble Pelasgians too!
Among their townships is Knosos, a great city, in which Minos
ruled from the age of nine, held converse with great Zeus,
and was father to my father, great-hearted Deukalion.
Deukalion sired both me and the lordly Idomeneus,
who'd set out for Ilion in his curved ships along with
the sons of Atreus. My own famous name is Aithon;
I was the younger by birth, he my elder and better.
It was there I met Odysseus, gave him a guest-friend's gifts,
for a gale-force wind had brought him too to Krete
as he made for Troy, driving him off course past Malea.
So he put in to Amnisos, site of the cave of Eileithyia,
in a difficult harbor, having barely escaped the storm.
He went up to the city at once, and asked for Idomeneus,
claiming to be his dear and respected guest-friend; but
it was ten or eleven days since Idomeneus had gone,
sailing away with his curved ships to Ilion. So I
escorted him to our house, and welcomed him properly,
with full entertainment from our rich household store;
and for the rest of the comrades who were with him I obtained
from public reserves both barley and bright red wine,
and sacrificial cattle, to keep them well satisfied.
There for twelve days the noble Achaians were delayed
by a north wind so powerful it wouldn't even let them stand
upright: I suppose some maleficent deity roused it.
But on the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they put to sea."
Thus he told many lies, but made them seem like the truth,and her tears flowed as she listened, her stubborn heart melted.
As snow will melt on a high mountain's ramparts, where
the east wind thaws the snow that a west wind has sent down, and, melting, it brims the fast-flowing rivers-just so
her fine cheeks streamed with the tears she shed as she wept for the husband sitting beside her. But though Odysseus
pitied his sobbing wife in his heart, yet nevertheless
his eyes-as though made of horn or iron-remained unwavering under their lids. Deceptively he concealed
his own tears. When she'd had her fill of tearful lamentation, once more she responded to him, saying: "Now I think
I need to make trial of you, stranger, and discover
whether you and your godlike comrades did in fact entertain my husband at home, the way you claim!
Tell me, what clothes was he wearing, what kind of person was he himself, which companions did he have with him?"
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to her, saying:
"Lady, it's hard for one who's been so long abroad to say for sure: it's now the twentieth year since he
departed thence, leaving my native country! However, I'll tell you how my memory pictures him today:
noble Odysseus had on a woolen cloak, purple in color,
and double-folded, its fibula fashioned of gold,
with twin pin-sheaths. On its front was delicately incised a hound with a dappled fawn gripped in its forepaws, watching it writhe: and everyone thought it marvelous
how the dog, though of gold, eyed the fawn it was throttling,
while the fawn's feet were struggling in its efforts to escape.
had a series of strong cords rigged through the narrow cobbled streets to cling to at need.
: "We know how to tell many lies as though they were the truth."
I noted the tunic he wore, too-it shone all over, like the sheen you see on the skin of a dried onion, so soft and sheer it was, and as bright as sunlight,
and many indeed were the women who marveled at it.
And another thing I will tell you, and you take it to heart:
I don't know whether Odysseus wore such clothes at home,
or if some comrade gave him them on boarding that swift ship, or a stranger perhaps, since to many Odysseus was
a good friend, and few Achaians could be called his equal.
I gave him a bronze sword myself and a double-folded cloak-a fine purple one-and a tunic with a fringe, and saw him off properly in his well-benched vessel. And there was a herald with him, a slightly older man-
Let me describe him to you, as I recall he looked-
round-shouldered, dark of complexion, with curly hair, and his name was Eurybates. Odysseus respected him more than his other companions: they were a like-minded pair."
So he spoke, and stirred in her heart yet more the urge to weep,
since she recognized the sure signs that Odysseus had told her.
But when she had had her fill of tearful lamentation, she then responded to him, saying: "Hitherto, stranger,
you've earned our pity; but from this time on in my halls you'll receive the treatment that's kept for an honored friend!
I myself gave him those clothes, just as you describe them,
from the storeroom, folded them, attached that bright brooch as an ornament for him! But himself I'll never welcome returning back home to his own beloved country:
an ill-fated day it was, then, when Odysseus set out
in his hollow ship to ill Ilion-that unspeakable name!"
To her then resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Respected wife of Odysseus, son of Laërtes,
no longer mar your fair flesh, nor waste away your heart in mourning your husband-though I cannot blame you:
for any woman will weep when she's lost her wedded
husband, to whom she's borne children, conceived in love, though he'll not be an Odysseus, who they say was like the gods. Now stop your crying, and attend to my words, for I'm going to tell you the truth, and hold back nothing.
I recently heard news concerning Odysseus' return-
that he's near, in the rich country of the Thesprotians, still alive, and bringing with him much splendid treasure,
collecting it through the region. But his trusty companions he lost, with his hollow ship, on the wine-dark deep
on his way from the isle of Thrinakie, for Zeus and Helios
made him sufferbecause his comrades had slaughtered Helios' cattle. So they all perished in the surging deep; but him,
astride his ship's keel, the waves then cast ashore
in the country of the Phaiakians, who are kin to the gods.
These treated him like a god, paid him heartfelt honors,
gave him many gifts, and were themselves quite willing
to escort him home unscathed. Odysseus would have been back here long since, had he not thought it more gainful to amass a great deal of wealth by wide world travel:
for Odysseus excels all mortals in his knowledge of ways
to profit, a field in which no other man could match him. King Pheidon of the Thesprotians told me as much. Moreover he told me on oath, while pouring libations at home,
that the ship had been launched, and the crew were in readiness
to convey him to his own country. But me he sent off first, since there chanced to be a Thesprotian vessel ready
to sail for Doulichion, that country rich in wheat.
And he showed me all the possessions Odysseus had amassed- enough to support his descendants to the tenth generation
were the treasures stored for him there in the king's domain! But Odysseus, he said, had gone to Dodone,to discover
from the deep-leaved sacred oak what Zeus was planning and how he should make his way back to Itháke's rich land after so long an absence, whether openly or in secret.
Thus, as I say, he is safe, he'll be here at any moment:
he's very near now, not much longer will he be absent
from his friends and his country! I'll give you my sworn word: Zeus first, highest and best of gods, be my witness,
and the hearth of peerless Odysseus, to which I have come,
that all these things indeed will come to pass as I tell you!
Prudent Penelope then responded to him, saying:
"Would that these words of yours, stranger, might be fulfilled!
Then you'd soon know both friendship and gifts in plenty
from me-any man who met you would call you blessed! But this is how, in my heart, I think it will be: Odysseus will nevermore come home, nor will you obtain conveyance-there are no longer such masters in this house
as Odysseus was among men-if he ever existed-
to welcome respected strangers or escort them on their way.
Nevertheless, my handmaids, bathe him, make his bed
with bedding and coverlets and bright-colored blankets, so he's warm until he comes through to Dawn the golden-throned.
Then early tomorrow bathe him and rub him with oil,
so that in here beside Telemachos he may sharpen his appetite as he sits in the hall. It will be the worse for any of these
men who rudely annoys him: such a man will have no future here from now on, no matter how angrily he reacts!
For how will you learn about me, stranger, whether I
really excel other women in mind and prudent counsel if you sit down to a meal in my hall unwashed
and in threadbare clothes? Men's span of life is brief. Whoever is harsh himself, whose mind knows harshness,
on him all mortals invoke disaster for the future
while he lives, and the whole world mocks him once he's dead. But whoever is blameless himself, and has blameless thoughts, strangers will spread his renown both far and wide
among all mankind, and many will praise his nobility."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to her, saying:
"Respected wife of Odysseus, son of Laërtes,
coverlets and bright-colored blankets have been hateful to me ever since I left Krete's snow-clad mountains behind me, and sailed away in my long-oared ship.
I shall bed down as I've done on other sleepless nights:
many the nights I've spent on some wretched resting place, lying there waiting for the brightly enthroned Dawn!
Nor does the washing of feet bring solace of any kind
to my heart: there isn't a woman that shall touch my feet
of all the servants you have here in this house-unless
there's maybe some aged woman, with a devoted heart, who's suffered as much in her spirit as I have myself:
I wouldn't have any objection to her handling my feet."
Once more prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Dear guest, never yet, of the strangers from distant places,
has a man so sagacious been more welcome in my home- so well-phrased and responsible is everything you say!
I do have one such old woman, very sensible-minded, who nursed and cared for that unfortunate man,
cradled him in her arms the day his mother bore him.
It's she who shall wash your feet, enfeebled though she is. Come on, up with you now, my prudent Eurykleia,
and wash one of an age with your master: Odysseus, I'm sure, must by now have just such feet and just such hands,
for too soon does the stress of ill-fortune age us mortals."
So she spoke: the old woman hid her face in her hands, shed hot tears, then uttered words of lamentation, saying:
"Alas, child, for you I am helpless. Zeus must have hated you- devout heart though you had-beyond all other men.
Never yet to Zeus, hurler of thunderbolts, did a mortal
burn so many fat thighs, such splendid arrays of oxen as you offered up, with prayers that you might achieve a sleek old age and rear your illustrious son. But now
you alone he's wholly deprived of a day of homecoming!
He too, I imagine, was jeered at by the women
of far-distant strangers, when he came to some house of renown, just as these bitches here all together are making fun of you,
and it's to avoid their mistreatment and endless insults
that you won't let them wash you; so it's me, nothing loath, to whom Ikarios' prudent daughter Penelope's given the job.
So I'll wash your feet, for both Penelope's sake and yours, since the heart in my breast is stirred by sorrow. But now take good note of what I'm about to say to you:
Many a travel-worn stranger's made his way here, but none,
I tell you, have I yet seen who bore so close a resemblance
as you do-voice, build, and gait-to Odysseus himself."
To her resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying: "Old dame, that's what everyone says who's seen us both: that we resemble each other closely-a likeness
that you too now have noticed, and remarked on."
So he spoke.
The old woman took the bright cauldron, and prepared to wash him. She first poured out a lot of cold water,
then added some hot. But Odysseus sat down by the hearth, and at once turned away toward the darker side, because
he'd suddenly realized that when she was handling him she would notice the scar, and the truth would be revealed.
And indeed, as she settled in close to wash her lord, she did at once know the scar, of a wound that a boar's white tusk
had made when he went to Parnassos, to Autolykos and his sons-
his mother's noble father, who outstripped all mankind in thieving and artful oaths, a talent bestowed by a god-
Hermes, to whom he burned acceptable thigh pieces
of lambs and kids, and so was quite ready to protect him. Now Autolykos paid a visit to the rich land of Itháke,
where he found the son of his daughter, recently born,
and Eurykleia placed the baby on his knees at the moment he was finishing supper, then spoke, and addressed him, saying: "Autolykos, up to you now to find a name to bestow on
your own child's dear child: he has been much prayed for." To her Autolykos then responded, saying: "My daughter's husband,
and you, my daughter, give him the name I shall tell you.
Since I come here as one who's dealt pain and grief to many, men and women alike, over the fruitful earth,
let his name be Odysseus;and I, for my part, when he
comes as a grown man to the great house on Parnassos
of his mother's family, where I keep my possessions, will give him his share, and send him back rejoicing."
This was what Odysseus had come for, to get his splendid gifts. Autolykos greeted him, and the sons of Autolykos too,
with handshakes and expressions of cordial welcome,
and his mother's mother, Amphithee, embraced Odysseus, and kissed his head and both of his beautiful eyes,
and Autolykos gave the word to his illustrious sons to get dinner ready, and they responded to his call.
At once they brought in a male ox, five years old,
flayed it, dressed it, butchered the whole carcass, expertly cut up the pieces and threaded them on spits, roasted these carefully and then shared out the portions.
So all day long until the hour when the sun went down
they feasted, and no one lacked his fair share of the meal.
But after the hour of sunset, when darkness came on, then they retired to rest, and embraced the gift of sleep.
When Dawn appeared, early risen and rosy-fingered,
they sallied forth on the hunt, both the dogs and the sons
of Autolykos: and along with them noble Odysseus
went too. Up the steep slopes of the forest-clad mountain Parnassos they climbed, and soon reached its windy ravines.
The sun was just striking the fields below on its way
up from the peaceful and deep-flowing stream of Ocean
when the hunters came to a forest glen. Ahead of them went
the dogs, pursuing a scent, and close behind them Autolykos' sons, among them noble Odysseus, hard on
the heels of the dogs, and brandishing his far-shadowing spear. There, in a dense thicket, was crouched a huge wild boar.
The damp force of driving winds could not penetrate its lair,
nor the sun with its gleaming rays shine into it, nor the rain pierce right through its protection, so thick it was; and the drifts of fallen leaves had piled up in their abundance round it.
Now the boar heard the sound of footfalls, from men and dogs
pressing on in the hunt, and out from his lair he came
to face them, back all abristle, fire glinting from his eyes, and stood close at bay. Then, first of them all, Odysseus sprang forward, long spear raised high in his stout hand, ready to strike; but the boar beat him to it, gored him
above the knee, tore with his tusk a long gash in the flesh,
attacking him slantwise, but failed to reach his leg-bone; and Odysseus struck him squarely in the right shoulder, so that the bright spear's point now drove clean through.
The boar gasped, and fell in the dust, and the life fled from him.
Autolykos' sons then busied themselves with the carcass,
and the wound that blameless godlike Odysseus had suffered they skillfully bandaged, and stanched the flow of dark blood with a charm,then went straight back to their father's house.
So Autolykos, and the sons of Autolykos, healed him
fully and well, handed over his splendid gifts, and then
soon sent him back rejoicing to his native country, to Itháke; and there his father and lady mother
welcomed him home with pleasure, asked detailed questions about how he came to be wounded; he told them the way
the boar's white tusk had gored him when he was out hunting
up on Parnassos, together with the sons of Autolykos.
This scar the old woman recognized when she felt it
in the palms of her hands, and she dropped his leg. It fell shin first into the basin, with a clatter of bronze:
the basin tipped over, the water spilled out on the floor,
as joy and grief together invaded her heart, her eyes
filled with tears, and her voice stuck in her throat.
Her hand reached out to touch Odysseus' chin, she gasped: "It's you, Odysseus, dear child, and I didn't know you
until I'd handled the rest of my master's person!"
With that she turned her glance in Penelope's direction, wanting to show her that her dear husband was there,
but Athene distracted Penelope's mind, so she could neither meet her eye nor guess at her meaning. As for Odysseus,
he felt for Eurykleia's throat with his right hand, seized it,
with the other drew her close to him, and whispered, saying: "Old nurse, are you trying to kill me? You yourself suckled me at your own breast! And now, after suffering much,
I've come, in the twentieth year, back to my own country!
But since you've hit on the truth, and a god's alerted you,
hush now, don't let anyone else in the house find out! For if you do, this I tell you, and it shall come to pass: should some god let me put down these lordly suitors,
I shall not spare you, my nurse though you were, when I slay those other serving women, here in my halls."
Then prudent Eurykleia responded to him, saying: "My child,
what's this word that's escaped the barrier of your teeth? You know how firm my strength is, how unyielding-
I shall keep your secret as close as hard stone or iron!
And another thing I will tell you, and you take it to heart:
If some god lets you put down these lordly suitors, then I'll report to you on the women in your halls,
which ones dishonor you, and which remain innocent."
To her resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying:
"Old mother, why tell me of them? There's no need! I myself
shall take good note and discover the truth about each one. No, just keep my secret, and leave the rest to the gods."
So he spoke. The old woman went off through the hall to fetch fresh foot-washing water, for the first lot was all spilt;
and when she'd washed him, and rubbed him well with oil,
Odysseus once more drew his chair back nearer the fire
to warm himself, and concealed the scar beneath his rags.
Then prudent Penelope started their conversation, saying: "Stranger, there's one small thing I still must ask you,
since soon it will be the time for pleasant repose-at least,
for him whom sweet sleep possesses despite his cares!
But to me some deity's brought a sorrow that's measureless: by day I find my pleasure in mourning and lamentation, while I look to my household tasks, and those of my women;
but when night comes, and sleep catches everybody else,
I lie on my bed, and around my throbbing heart
sharp cares come crowding, to disquiet me as I lament. Just as Pandareus' daughter, the greenwood nightingale, at the fresh onset of spring sings sweetly, sitting
perched amid the thick foliage of the trees, and with
close variant trills pours forth her rippling song, a dirge lamenting her dear son Itylos, the son of King Zethos,whom once with the bronze she slew unwittingly-even so my heart's torn in two directions, this way and that:
should I stay here with my son, keep everything unchanged-
property, serving women, this large and high-roofed house- respecting the bed of my husband and public opinion?
Or should I now wed whoever's the best of the Achaians courting me here in my halls, bringing me countless gifts?
So long as my son was thinking and behaving as a child,
he wouldn't let me abandon my husband's house to remarry; but now he's full-grown and has come to manhood's stature he even begs me to go back home, so concerned he's become for his patrimony, which these Achaians are eating up.
"But come, hear this dream of mine, and interpret it for me:
I had twenty geese round the house, they came up from the water and I fed them on wheat: the sight of them warmed my heart.
But down from the mountain swooped a great eagle, with curved beak,
broke all their necks and killed them. They lay scattered
all over the hall, while the eagle soared up in the bright sky.
I wept and wailed, although it was only a dream,
and the fine-tressed Achaian women gathered around me as I grieved sadly because the eagle had killed my geese. But then back it came, perched on a jutting rafter,
and with the voice of a human caught me short, declaring:
'Take heart, you daughter of far-famed Ikarios: this
is no dream, but a true vision, that will surely be fulfilled! These geese are the suitors,and I, who before was a bird, the eagle, have now at last come back as your husband, who'll unleash a grim fate on all the suitors.'
So he spoke.
Then honey-sweet sleep released its hold upon me, and glancing around I saw the geese in my domain
pecking up grain by the trough, as they'd done previously."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"Madam, no way is it possible, by twisting its clear meaning,
to interpret this dream any other way, since Odysseus himself has shown you how he'll fulfill it! The doom of all the suitors is clear! Not one of them will escape death and the fates!"
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Stranger, dreams are hard to make sense of or interpret,
and not all of them reach fulfillment for us mortals. For there are two gateways set up for fleeting dreams,
of which one is constructed from horn, the other from ivory.
Those dreams that come through the gate of sawn ivory
are deceptive, bringing words that remain unfulfilled;
but those that emerge from the gate of polished horn
presage the truth for anyone who beholds them.But for me it was not, I think, from there that my own strange dream
came-welcome though that would have been to me and my son!
And another thing I will tell you, and you take it to heart:
The ill-starred day is approaching that's to remove me
from the house of Odysseus: for now I shall order a contest- those axes that he used to set up here in his halls
in a straight line, like ships' props, twelve of them all told-
he'd stand at a distance, and shoot an arrow through them.
So now I shall order this contest for the suitors:whoever, handling his bow, shall string it most easily and then shoot an arrow clear through all twelve axes, with him I'd depart, leaving this house to which I came
as a wedded wife-a fine home, and full of rich possessions!
I think I shall always remember it, even in my dreams."
To her resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying: "Respected wife of Odysseus, son of Laërtes,
do not any longer delay this contest in your house,
for resourceful Odysseus will arrive here before that-
before these fellows can get to handle the polished bow, or string it, or shoot an arrow clean through the iron."
Then
to him prudent Penelope responded, saying: "If you were only willing, stranger, to sit on here in my halls
and amuse me, sleep would never be shed upon my eyelids! But no way can people possibly go without sleep forever;
and so to each one of us mortals on this grain-giving earth the immortals have allotted a proper time for repose.
So I shall go on back to my upper chamber and lie
on my bed, though it's become a place of mourning for me, always made damp by my tears, since the day when Odysseus
left to set eyes on ill Ilion-that unspeakable name! 
That's where I shall lie; but you sleep here in the hall-
spread your own bedding, or have them make you up a bed."
So saying, she went off back to her bright upper chamber,
not alone, for her handmaids accompanied her. And after she'd retired to her upper chamber with her handmaids, then she wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
grey-eyed Athene cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.


BOOK 20

But noble Odysseus bedded down for sleep in the forecourt. On the ground he spread out an undressed oxhide, above it putting many fleeces from sheep the Achaians had sacrificed; and when he settled, Eurynome threw a cloak over him.
So Odysseus, brooding on evil for the suitors in his heart
lay there, still wakeful. And then from their hall the women emerged-those who had taken to sleeping with the suitors- laughing and chattering cheerfully one to another; and rage erupted now in his breast, and much he debated,
emotion and reason competing for his decision, whether
to get up and rush them now, deal death to each one of them, or leave them to couple one last and final time
with these arrogant suitors. And his inner heart was growling as a bitch standing over her helpless puppies will growl
at some unfamiliar man, more than ready to fight him: so
his heart growled within him, enraged at their bad behavior. But he beat his breast, and upbraided his heart, declaring: "Endure, my heart! Worse than this you once endured
that day when the Kyklops, unmatchable in his strength,
was eating my valiant comrades; but you held on, till my plan
brought you safe out of that cave where you thought you'd die."
So he spoke, addressing the dear spirit in his breast.
In full obedience to him, his heart now endured without pause; but he himself kept tossing and turning.
As a man cooking a paunch chockful of fat and blood
on a fierce blazing fire will turn it to and fro, determined to get it cooked through as fast as he can,
so Odysseus tossed this way and that, trying to work out how he was going to lay hands on the shameless suitors,
one man against so many. Then Athene approached him,
down from the sky, in appearance like a woman,
and stood above his head, and addressed him, saying: "Wakeful again, you most ill-fated of all mortals?
This is your own house, and in this house are your wife
and son-such a son indeed as anybody might pray for!"
To her then resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Yes indeed, goddess, all you've said is right and proper. But here is what the heart in my breast is debating:
how I'm going to lay hands on these shameless suitors,
alone, while they're always in a body when they're here.
What's more, there's this greater problem that I'm facing: even if-both Zeus and you willing-I do kill them,
how then would I make my escape? Please consider that!"
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, responded to him, saying:
"Stubborn man! There are many who'd trust a weaker comrade-
a mortal, without any knowledge of such wisdom as mine!
But I am a god, one who guards you through to the end in all your endeavors! And I'll tell you this openly:
if there were fifty troops of mortal men in ambush
all round us, firmly determined to kill us, nevertheless
even then you'd drive off with their cattle and fattened sheep! But for now let sleep overtake you. To stay awake on watch all night is a bad thing too. Soon you'll be free of troubles."
So she spoke, and shed sleep on his eyelids, but herself,
bright among goddesses, made her way back to Olympos.
While sleep, the limb-loosener, still had hold of him, relaxing the cares of his heart, his affectionate wife awoke and wept, sitting up there, still in her soft bed. But when her spirit had had its fill of weeping, then she,
bright among women, first prayed to Artemis, saying:
"Artemis, lady goddess, daughter of Zeus, how I wish you'd shoot a shaft into my breast and take away my life now, at this instant, or a storm wind would snatch me up, whirl me away along those dark murky pathways,
cast me forth at the mouth of refluent Ocean, as once
storm winds carried away Pandareus' daughters! The gods had killed their parents, and they were left abandoned
as orphans there in the halls, and were cared for by Aphrodite with cheese and sweet honey and pleasant-tasting wine;
and Here bestowed on them, above all other women,
beauty and wisdom, while chaste Artemis gave them stature,
and Athene made them accomplished in elegant handiwork. But while bright Aphrodite was making for high Olympos- to Zeus, with his joy in the thunderbolt, for well he knows all,
both the good fortune and the misfortunes of transient mortals-
to ask for these girls the fulfillment of a healthy marriage, the storm winds' spirits meanwhile snatched them away
and surrendered them to the mercy of the loathsome Furies.So, I wish, might those powers whose homes are on Olympos
annihilate me, or fair-tressed Artemis strike me-Odysseus
would be in my mind's eye as I went under this hated earth, and I'd never pleasure the thoughts of any lesser husband!
Yet the burden's endurable for anyone who weeps
in the daytime, constantly moved by deep distress at heart,
but is mastered by sleep at night, for sleep brings forgetfulness
of all things, both good and bad, once it's shrouded the eyelids. Yet on me some god laid the burden of evil dreams as well,
for this night there lay in my arms one exactly like him, as he was when he left with his troops, and so my spirit
rejoiced, for I thought it no dream, but rather a waking vision."
So she spoke, and straightway Dawn, the golden-throned, came up. The sound of her voice, weeping, got through to noble Odysseus: he tried to think, and it seemed to his half-asleep mind
that she'd recognized him and was standing there at his head.
Then he picked up the cloak, and the fleeces that he'd slept on,
put them down on a chair in the hall, and carried the oxhide
outside, and left it. Hands raised, he then made his prayer to Zeus: "Zeus, Father, if willingly you gods have now brought me back over dry and wet to my country, after troubling me so much,
let one of those waking inside speak a word of omen for me,
and out here a sign from Zeus be made manifest as well."
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus the Counselor heard him.
At once he delivered thunder from gleaming Olympos on high out of the clouds, and noble Odysseus rejoiced.
And a woman, a grinder of grain, sent forth a word of omen
from the house nearby where the mills of the people's shepherd were set. At these twelve women all told were workers, grinding barley and wheat, men's marrow. By now the others were all asleep, having ground their quota of wheat, and she
was the only one who'd not finished, for she was the weakest.
She stopped her quern now and uttered an omen for her lord: "Zeus, Father, lord over gods and men, how loudly
you thundered out of the starry sky, yet nowhere is there
any trace of cloud: this must be a portent you're granting someone!
Then fulfill for poor me too the wish I shall now pronounce:
May this be the final and latest day on which these suitors enjoy their delectable feast in the halls of Odysseus, they who've weakened my knees with so much agonizing labor grinding their grain: may this dinner be their last!"
So she spoke: noble Odysseus rejoiced at the words of omen
and the thunder of Zeus, as he planned revenge upon the guilty.
The other serving women in Odysseus' splendid house
were up now. They rekindled unwearying fire on the hearth, and Telemachos rose from his bed, a godlike mortal,
put on his clothes, slung a sharp sword from his shoulder,
bound on a pair of fine sandals under his sleek feet,
picked out a sturdy spear, tipped with keen bronze, and went and stood at the threshold, and then addressed Eurykleia, saying: "Dear nurse, have you honored the stranger in our house
with a bed and food, or does he lie as he is, uncared-for?
Clever my mother may be, but that's her way: on impulse she'll do the honors for some person who's entirely unimportant, yet dismiss his better with no respect."
To him then prudent Eurykleia responded, saying: "Child,
in this case you shouldn't blame her, when she's blameless.
He sat there drinking wine as long as he'd a mind to,
but for food he said he'd no more appetite: she asked him. Then later, when his thoughts turned to lying down and sleep, she told her serving women to make up a bed for him;
but he-like some totally wretched and ill-fated person-
didn't want to sleep in a bed or under blankets, but chose to doss down on an undressed oxhide and fleeces of sheep in the forecourt: we had to throw a cloak over him."
So she spoke. Telemachos made his way out through the hall,
spear in hand, two hunting dogs at his heels, and went
to the place of assembly to join the well-greaved Achaians. Now Eurykleia, bright among women-daughter of Ops, Peisenor's son-addressed the handmaids, saying: "To work! Some of you busy yourselves with sweeping the house out,
sprinkling the floors, and dressing the well-made chairs
with their purple coverlets; others wipe off all the tables with sponges, wash clean the mixing-bowls and the crafted two-handled drinking cups; others go fetch water
from the spring-and move smartly, get it back here soon!
For the suitors won't be long absent from the hall: they'll return
good and early: this is a public feast day."
So she spoke, and each one listened with care and did what she ordered: twenty set off to the spring of dark water, while the rest went knowledgeably about their various tasks in the house.
Then in came the spirited menservants and began
to split logs well and skillfully, while the women
returned from the spring; and after them came the swineherd driving three hogs, the best ones of all that he had;
these he let out to graze in the lush enclosures,
and himself put a friendly query to Odysseus, saying:
"Stranger, do the Achaians show you more regard now? Or are they still insulting you here in the hall, as before?"
To him resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Eumaios, would that the gods might exact requital for the outrage
of these men, who in their arrogance behave so recklessly
in another man's house, and have no sense of shame."
Such was the conversation they had with one another. Then up to them came Melanthios, the goatherd, driving those she-goats that were the finest of all in his flocks
to make a meal for the suitors. Two herdsmen accompanied him.
The goats he tethered beneath the echoing colonnade, then addressed Odysseus abusively, saying: "Stranger,
won't you ever stop making yourself a nuisance in this house, begging alms from the men here? Can't you get out and stay out?
I'm pretty sure that we two won't part company until
we've sampled each other's fists, since your begging isn't done in the proper way. And besides, there are other Achaian feasts."
So he spoke. Resourceful Odysseus made him no answer, but shook his head in silence, mind brooding on trouble.
The third to arrive beside these was Philoitios, leader of men,
driving up for the suitors a barren heifer and she-goats brought over by ferrymen, who also convey others, travelers, whoever approaches them for passage.
The beasts he tethered with care in the echoing colonnade,
and then went up to the swineherd, and addressed him, saying: "Who is this stranger, swineherd, who's recently arrived
here in our house? From what men does he claim descent? Where is his family? What is the country of his birth?
Ill-fated, yes, but he still has the mien of a lord, a king-
though the gods do afflict men who wander far and wide, spinning a wretched fate for them, princes though they be."
With that he turned to Odysseus, hand outstretched in greeting, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Stranger, father, all hail to you! May prosperity be your lot hereafter,
though now you're weighed down by plentiful misfortunes!
Zeus, Father, no other god's more lethal than you are: once you've created men, you show them no pity for the hardship and miserable suffering they must endure!
I broke sweat at the sight of you, my eyes are full of tears
as I remember Odysseus, for I fancy he too must be
clothed in just such rags as he wanders among men- that is, if he's still living, and sees the light of the sun! But if he's already dead, down in Hades' realm, then woe is me for peerless Odysseus, who put me in charge
of his cattle, when I was a boy still, in Kephallenian country.
By now they've bred past counting: no other way could you get a better harvest of broad-browed cattle!
But others now order me to drive these cows in for them
to eat! They pay no attention to the son of the house,
nor does the gods' wrath scare them: these days they're bent
on sharing out the possessions of their long-absent lord! Here is a problem that the heart in my breast turns over endlessly: it would be wrong, while the son's still alive, to take off, cattle and all, to the district of others,
to alien folk: yet it's worse to stay on here, and suffer
misery tending steers now claimed by somebody else!
Long since, indeed, I'd have fled to some other strong prince, since life here's no longer endurable; but I still think
of that unfortunate man, who might yet come back
from wherever, and scatter the suitors throughout his house."
To him resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Cowherd, since you seem neither ill-intentioned nor witless, and I
can recognize for myself the good sense of your mind,
I will speak out, and swear a great oath in confirmation:
Zeus, first of gods, be my witness, and this guest-friendly board,
and the hearth of peerless Odysseus, to which I have come, that indeed while you are here Odysseus shall come home, and with your own eyes you shall see, if you're so minded, the slaughter of the suitors, now lording it here."
To him
then responded the herder of cattle, saying: "How I wish,
stranger, that Kronos' son would fulfill these words of yours- Then you'd discover my strength, and how my hands enforce it!"
In like manner Eumaios now prayed to all the gods
that quick-witted Odysseus might come back to his own home.
Such was the conversation they had with one another.
Meanwhile the suitors were busy plotting death and doom for Telemachos, when a bird came close to them on the left, a high-flighted eagle, clutching a tremulous dove. At this Amphinomos addressed them, saying: "This plan of ours,
to murder Telemachos, will not, I fear, end well
for us, my friends: let us rather be busy with our feasting."
So Amphinomos spoke, and his words were pleasing to them. They made their way to the house of godlike Odysseus,
took off their cloaks, laid them down on the chairs and benches,
and began the slaughter for sacrifice of large sheep,
plump goats, and fattened hogs, with a heifer from the herd. They roasted the innards and served them, and mixed the wine in bowls, and the swineherd passed drinking cups around, while Philoitios, leader of men, served them with bread
in beautiful baskets, and Melanthios poured their wine.
So they reached out their hands to the good things ready for them.
Now Telemachos seated Odysseus-exploiting his advantage- in the well-built hall, but close to the stone threshold,
set a mean stool for him, beside a little table,
laid a helping of innards beside him, poured him wine
in a golden cup, and then addressed him, saying:
"Sit here among these men now, and drink your wine:
I myself will protect you from the mockery and the blows of all the suitors, since this is no public resort
but the house of Odysseus-his legacy to me!
And you suitors, restrain your urge to utter insults
or use your fists, lest strife-and a fight-arise between us."
So he said. Every one of them bit his lip and marveled at Telemachos, because of his bold outspoken manner;
and Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, now addressed them, saying:
"Hard though it is, Achaians, we must now accept this speech
of Telemachos, however boldly his words threaten us-although had Kronos' son Zeus not forbidden it, we should by now
have stopped him short in his halls, clear speaker though he is."
So Antinoös spoke; Telemachos paid no heed to what he said.
Heralds meanwhile were leading beasts through the city for a lavish sacrifice, and the long-haired Achaians gathered beneath a shady grove of Apollo, the deadly archer.
When they'd roasted the outer meat and drawn it off the spits
they shared out the portions and enjoyed a splendid feast;
and beside Odysseus the servers set a portion equal
to that which they got themselves: such was the command of Telemachos, own dear son of godlike Odysseus.
Athene, however, would not let these haughty suitors back off
at all from their grievous conduct: she wanted its pain to sink
still deeper into the heart of Laërtes' son Odysseus.
There was among the suitors a man bred in lawlessness, Ktesippos by name, who had his home on Same.
He, confident in his possession of prodigious wealth,
was courting the wife of the long-absent Odysseus.
Now he addressed himself to the arrogant suitors, saying: "Give ear, you proud suitors: I've something to say to you. His portion the stranger's long had, as is right and proper- an equal one: it's neither decent nor just to short-change
any guest of Telemachos who may come to this house!
I too, then, will give him a present, so that he in turn may offer it as a prize to the foot washer or some other servant here in the house of godlike Odysseus."
So saying, he hurled with strong hand the hoof of an ox, that he seized from the basket where it was lying; but Odysseus dodged it,
quickly ducking his head, and masked his inner anger with a bitter grimace. The ox hoof struck the solid wall. Telemachos addressed Ktesippos in harsh words, saying: "Ktesippos, this business only let you escape with your life
since you didn't in fact hit the stranger: he dodged your missile!
Otherwise I'd have run my sharp spear through your body, and instead of a wedding your father would have been busy fixing your tomb! So let no man be seen misbehaving
here in my house: I now note all, and grasp each detail,
good or bad, where, before, I was only a child. Yet still
we are forced to endure the spectacle of such actions
as the slaughter of sheep, the endless consumption of wine and food, since it's hard for one man to hold back many. Come then, harm me no further in your ill-will-though even should you be determined to murder me with the bronze,
that too I'd rather choose: it would be far preferable
to die than to go on witnessing these unseemly actions- strangers maltreated, women servants forcibly dragged and manhandled everywhere in this beautiful building."
So he spoke, and they all were hushed in silence. At last Agelaös, son of Damastor, addressed them, saying: "Friends, in response to what has been fairly and justly spoken
no man should take offense, make a hostile retort.
So don't treat this stranger roughly, or indeed any
of the servants here in the house of godlike Odysseus!
To Telemachos and his mother I'd like to say a word
as a friend, that might just appeal to them both at heart:
So long as you in your breasts still nursed the hope
that quick-witted Odysseus might yet return to his home,
there could be no objection to your holding on, and keeping
the suitors at bay in your house, since this was the better course were Odysseus to return, back as lord in his own domain;
but it's clear enough now that he's never going to return- so, Telemachos, sit by your mother and tell her this:
she should wed the best of these men, who offers her most:
that way you'll enjoy your inheritance undiminished,
eating and drinking, while she can keep house for someone else."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "No, Agelaös, by Zeus, and by the sufferings of my father.
who may have died, or be wandering yet, far from Itháke,
no way am I delaying my mother's marriage-I've told her
to wed any man she wants to: I'll give them countless presents!
But I'd be ashamed, were she unwilling, to force her
out of this house-may no god ever bring such a thing to pass!"
So Telemachos spoke. But Pallas Athene now stirred in
the suitors laughter unquenchable, sent their wits astray:the jaws from which laughter issued seemed not their own, and the meat they were eating bloodstained, while their eyes
were brimming with tears, and their minds imagined wailing.
Then godlike Theoklymenos spoke up among them, saying:
"Wretched men! What's this horror you're suffering? Your heads and faces, your knees beneath them, are shrouded in night- lamentation's afire, all dabbled with tears your cheeks,
blood-bespattered the walls and elegant panels;
crowded with ghosts is the forecourt, crowded the yard,
all flocking in darkness to Erebos, for now the sun has perished from heaven, a foul fog's swept over all."
So he spoke; but all of them crowed with laughter at him,
and Eurymachos, Polybos' son, made the first comment, saying:
"He's out of his mind, is this stranger just come from elsewhere!
Quick, boys, out of the house with him, have him go down to the marketplace, since he finds it dark as night in here."
To him godlike Theoklymenos then responded, saying: "Eurymachos, I'm not asking you to provide me with guides!
I still have my own eyes and ears and both my feet,
and a mind in my breast in no way wrongly fashioned.
Using them I shall quit this house, for I sense trouble coming upon you that none of the suitors may escape or avoid
who here in the house of godlike Odysseus abuse
other men with violence, commit acts of reckless folly."
So saying, he walked out of that pleasantly sited house, and went to Peiraios, who gave him a friendly welcome.
Now all the suitors, glancing at one another, tried
to provoke Telemachos by mocking his guests. And thus
would one of these haughty youths harangue him, saying:
"Telemachos, no one has worse luck than you with his guests! Like this vagrant here, brought in, whom you maintain- always wanting food and wine, no good at work,
no strength, nothing but a mere burden on the earth!
And now this other fellow, who stood up and prophesied!
If you took my advice, you'd do far better to let us throw these strangers aboard a ship of many rowlocks
and send them off to the Sikels:they'd fetch you a good price."
So spoke the suitors. Telemachos paid no heed to what they said,
but sat silently watching his father, always ready
for the moment when he'd lay hands on the shameless suitors.
Ikarios' prudent daughter Penelope had set down
her elegant chair so it faced them: she could now hear what each man was saying, there in the hall. For while
they were laughing, they'd also been readying their dinner- sweet and satisfying, since they'd slaughtered so many beasts.
Yet no more unpleasant supper could there have been than the one that a goddess and a powerful man
would soon serve to those who'd started such vile misdeeds.


BOOK 21

The goddess, grey-eyed Athene, now put it into the mind of Ikarios' daughter, prudent Penelope, to bring out
and set before the suitors the bow and the grey iron
in Odysseus' halls: a contest, and the start of the slaughter.
She climbed the high ladder that led to her own chamber,
and with her strong hand picked up the neatly hooked ke- bronze, finely wrought, with a fitted ivory handle-
and made her way, with her handmaids, to the very furthest storeroom, where were laid up her lord's rich treasures:
items of bronze and gold and carefully worked iron.
There too was stored his back-bent bow and the quiver
that held the arrows, and many the hurtful shafts packed in it,
gifts that a guest-friend gave him when they met in in Lakedaimon- Iphitos, Eurytos' son, in appearance like the immortals:
the two had encountered one another in Messene
at the house of skillful Ortilochos. In fact Odysseus was after a public debt then owed by the people:
for the men of Messenehad come in their many-oared ships
and lifted three hundred sheep from Itháke, with their shepherds.
It was for these that Odysseus had traveled far on a mission
while still a youth, dispatched by his father and other elders. Iphitos too was there in search of horses he'd lost:
a dozen brood mares, with sturdy suckling mules-
though these afterwards brought about his destined murder,
when he came to that stout-hearted son of Zeus, the mighty
Herakles, well acquainted with violent labors, who killed him, guest though he was, and in his own house-
merciless man!-regardless of the gods' wrath and the table he'd set before Iphitos. The man himself he slaughtered,
and the strong-hoofed mares he kept in his own domain.
It was on his quest for these that Iphitos met Odysseus, and gave him the bow once carried by great Eurytos, who left it after his death to his son in his high abode;
while Odysseus gave to Iphitos a sharp sword and a sturdy spear,
the start of a binding guest-friendship, yet they never
knew one another at table; before that, the son of Zeus
slew Iphitos, Eurytos' son, in appearance like the immortals, who gave the bow to Odysseus. But Odysseus never
took it with him when he went to war aboard the black ships:
he left it to lie there at home, a memento of a good friend.
He only ever carried it while still in his own country.
When Penelope, bright among women, reached the storeroom, and stepped up to the oaken threshold-which a carpenter once had expertly planed and fitted true to the level,
and set up the doorposts on it, and the shining doors on them-
at once she briskly detached the thong from its hook,
and thrust in the key, and shot back the bolts from the doors with a sure aim: they groaned loudly, the noise a bull makes as it grazes in pasture: so groaned the beautiful doors,
attacked by the key, and swiftly flew open for her.
She made for a high platform, where stood various chests in which fragrant garments were stored. There, reaching up
on tiptoe, she grasped and removed from its peg the bow together with the bright bow-case in which it was held.
This done, she sat down, with the case placed across her knees,
and burst into loud sobs as she took out her husband's bow. Then, when she'd had her fill of tearful lamentation,
she made her way to the hall, where the haughty suitors were, carrying in her hands the back-bent bow, with the quiver
that held the arrows, and many a hurtful shaft within it.
Serving women came with her, bearing a chest in which much iron and bronze lay stored, her husband's prizes.
When she, bright among women, came where the suitors were, she stood by the central post of the snugly timbered roof,
holding up her shining veil in front of her face
and flanked on either side by a devoted handmaid,
and at once she addressed the suitors, saying: "Hear me, you overbold suitors, you who've been using this house
as a base for feasting and drinking-continually, endlessly-
while its master's been so long absent; nor could you think up
any other excuse to offer in support of your presence
except your urge to wed me, make me your wife!-now come, since here, plain as day, is a contest for all you suitors
that I'll set before you: the great bow of godlike Odysseus!
Whoever, handling this bow, shall string it most easily,
and then shoot an arrow clear through all twelve axes,with him I'll depart, leaving this house I first came to
as a wedded wife-a fine home, and full of rich possessions! I think I shall always remember it, even in my dreams."
So she spoke, and then ordered Eumaios, the noble swineherd,
to set up for the suitors the bow and the grey iron.
Weeping, Eumaios took and arranged them: the cowherd too burst into tears at the sight of his master's bow. But now Antinoös spoke in reproof, and addressed them, saying:
"Stupid yokels, only concerned with things of the day!
Why, wretched pair, are you blubbering? It only agitates the heart in your mistress' breast! And that heart, as it is, lies grief-stricken, since she's lost her beloved bedfellow!
Either sit here and feast in silence, or, if cry you must,
go and do it outside. But the bow you must leave back here,
a decisive test for the suitors, for I don't imagine
this polished bow will prove an easy one to be strung: among all this crowd here there's not a single man such as Odysseus was-for I saw him myself,
and remember him well, though then I was only a child."
So he spoke; but the heart in his breast still hoped that he himself
would string the bow, shoot a shaft clear through the iron.
In fact, he would be the first to sample an arrow shot
by that same peerless Odysseus, whom, as he sat in the hall,
he was now insulting, and urging his comrades to do likewise.
Then Telemachos, princely in power, addressed them, saying: "Surely Kronos' son Zeus must have rendered me witless!
My own
dear mother, sensible though she is, declares
she'll abandon this house and go with another husband-
and yet I, in my witless mind, laugh and enjoy the fun!
But come now, you suitors, since here's the prize before you: a lady the like of whom there's none now in all Achaia,
or sacred Pylos, or Argos, or Mykenai, or even Itháke itself, or on the dark mainland. But you yourselves
know all this: what need for me to praise my mother?
So, don't sidetrack the matter in hand with excuses, stop putting off the bow's stringing: let's get to see it now!
Indeed, I myself might make trial of the bow-and if
I should string it, and shoot an arrow through the iron,
I shan't have to worry about my lady mother leaving
this house with another man: I shall still be here, one now well able to win my own father's splendid contests."
With that he stripped off the scarlet cloak from his shoulders, unslung his sharp sword, and sprang to his feet. He then
first of all set up the axes. He dug a trench, a single
long trench for them all, cut true to a line, and tamped
the earth down round them. All watching him were amazed that he set them up right, having never seen them before.
This done, he went to the threshold, to make trial of the bow.
Three times he made it quiver in his effort to bend it;
three times he gave up, though privately he still hoped
to string the bow and to shoot an arrow through the iron. At his fourth attempt, indeed, he'd have drawn and strung it, so determined he was; but Odysseus shook his head,and
stopped him.
Telemachos, princely in power, again addressed them, saying:
"Oh damn it, even in time to come I'll be mean and feeble,
or else I'm too young still, can't rely on the strength of my hands to defend me against some man who starts a quarrel!
So come now, all you whose strength is greater than mine,
make trial of the bow, and let's wind up this contest."
So he spoke and grounded the bow, left it standing against the close-fitting, well-polished door panels; and there too he propped a swift arrow against the elegant door hook.
Then he sat down again on the fine chair from which he'd risen.
Antinoös now addressed them, the son of Eupeithes, saying:
"All of you up in order, my comrades, from left to right, beginning from where the cupbearer pours the wine."
So spoke Antinoös, and what he said found approval.
The first to stand up was Leiodes, son of Oinops,
their diviner, who always sat at the back of the hall
by the beautiful mixing bowl: to him alone their reckless conduct was hateful. He disapproved of all the suitors. He now was the first to take the bow and swift arrow:
he went and stood at the threshold, made trial of the bow,
but failed to bend it. His hands-tender, unhardened-
too soon wearied of pulling. He addressed the suitors, saying: "Friends, I'm unable to bend it-let another man now try!
Many the lordly men this bow is going to deprive
of spirit and life, since indeed it's far preferable to die
than live on after failing at that in pursuit of which
we continue assembling here, in daily expectation! At present a man can still not only want but hope to marry Penelope, the bedfellow of Odysseus;
but when he's made trial of the bow, and seen the result,
then let him court with his gifts some other finely costumed
Achaian woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer, and comes as her fated spouse."
So he spoke and grounded the bow, left it standing against the close-fitting, polished door panels; and there too
he propped a swift arrow, against the elegant door hook.
Then he sat down again on the fine chair from which he'd risen. But Antinoös spoke in reproof, and addressed him, saying: "Leiodes,
what's this word that's escaped the barrier of your teeth,
so fearful and grievous an utterance? To hear it enrages me!
if it's true that this bow will deprive many lordly men
of spirit and life, because you yourself can't bend it, even so, though your lady mother didn't bear you to be
strong enough to string bows or shoot arrows, nevertheless other proud suitors there are who'll bend it soon enough!"
So he spoke, and gave orders to Melanthios the goatherd:
"To work, Melanthios! Get the fire going here in the hall, and beside it put a large chair with a fleece spread on it, and fetch out the big wheel of tallow you'll find inside,
so that we youths may warm the bow, and grease it with fat,
and so get to make trial of it, and conclude this contest."
So he spoke. Melanthios rekindled the unwearying fire, fetched, and set close by, a chair with a fleece spread on it, then brought out the large wheel of tallow he found inside.
With this the youths warmed the bow, then tried it, but still
failed to bend it. They had nothing near the needed strength.
But Antinoös still held back, as did godlike Eurymachos: they were the leading suitors, and far the best in prowess.
Two men now left the hall, going out together,
the cowherd and swineherd of godlike Odysseus; and he,
noble Odysseus himself, went close behind them. But when they were all outside the gates and the courtyard,
then he spoke, and addressed them in friendly manner, saying: "Cowherd, and you too, swineherd, shall I tell you something or keep it to myself ? Oh, my heart impels me to speak!
How would you feel about supporting Odysseus, were he suddenly to appear from somewhere, brought by some god?
Would you be on the side of the suitors, or of Odysseus? Tell me whatever your heart and spirit dictate!"
In answer the herdsman who cared for the cattle responded, saying:
"Zeus, Father, would that you might fulfill this wish! Now grant
that man his return, and a god to escort him! Then
you'd learn what strength I have, and how my hands employ it!"
Eumaios in the same way likewise prayed to all the gods that quick-witted Odysseus might return to his own home.
So when he'd found out for certain how these two were minded,
Odysseus once more responded, and addressed them, saying: "Back home now indeed I am! After suffering much hardship I've returned, in the twentieth year, to my native country!
I know that to both of you, alone of all my servants,
my arrival is truly welcome: of the rest I've not heard one
pray that I might return, make it back to my home!
So to you two I'll speak the truth, how it's going to be: if a god grants me victory over these haughty suitors,
I'll find wives for you both, and give you possessions,
and houses built close to my own; and for me thereafter
you'll be Telemachos' comrades, indeed his brethren!
And look, I'll show you another manifest sign
by which you may know me for sure and trust what I say- the scar of the wound that I got from a boar's white tusk
long ago, when I went up Parnassos with Autolykos' sons."
So saying, he pulled back his rags from over the great scar. When the two had examined it carefully, in detail, weeping they flung their arms about skillful Odysseus
and kissed his head and his shoulders in loving welcome,
while Odysseus likewise was kissing their heads and hands.
And now the sun would have gone down on their tears had not Odysseus himself put a stop to it, saying: "Quit your weeping and wailing! Somebody coming out here
from the hall might see us and report back to those inside.
Now, you two go on in, but separately, not together-
I'll go first, you after me. And let's have this as a signal: all the others, the whole crowd of these haughty suitors, won't agree to me being given the bow and the quiver; but you, noble Eumaios, as you go through the house
with the bow, put it into my hands-and order the women
to bar the close-fitting doors at the entrance to their quarters; and if any of them hear groans, or the thud of falling
men within our walls, they're not to go out, but remain just where they are, keep silent, and go on with their work.
And to you, noble Philoitios, I entrust the task of bolting
the courtyard gates, and quickly roping them shut as well."
So saying, he made his way into the pleasantly sited house, and went and sat down on the chair from which he'd risen; godlike Odysseus' two servants then followed him inside.
Eurymachos was now turning the bow about in his hands,
warming it, this side and that, in the fire's glow; yet not even thus could he bend it: his lordly heart was sore vexed,
and, deeply troubled, he now addressed them, saying: "Alas, here's distress for myself and for all of you too!
It's not this lost marriage that I lament so much,
grieved though I am; there are many Achaian ladies, some here on sea-girt Itháke, and more in other cities.
But if we're so far lacking in strength compared
to godlike Odysseus that we can't even bend and string
his bow-that's a disgrace that men yet unborn will hear of."
Antinoös, son of Eupeithes, then responded to him, saying: "It will not be so, Eurymachos, as you know very well!
Throughout the region this is the god's solemn feast day- who'd be bending a bow now? Today we'll take things easy,
so put that aside! And why don't we leave all the axes standing
where they are? No one, I think, is going to come here, to the hall of Odysseus, Laërtes' son, and remove them! So for now
let the wine steward pour the initial drops in our cups so we can offer libations, and lay the curved bow aside;
then early tomorrow morning tell the goatherd Melanthios
to bring the very best she-goats in all the herds, so we
may offer thigh-pieces to Apollo the famous archer,
and then make trial of the bow and conclude the contest."
So spoke Antinoös, and what he said found approval.
Now the heralds poured water over their hands, and youths
filled up the mixing-bowls with drink, poured drops into the cups for libation, then served wine to all.
After they'd offered libations and drunk all they'd a mind to, resourceful Odysseus addressed them, with deception in mind:
"Listen to me, you suitors of the illustrious queen,
to what the heart in my breast now urges me to tell you! To Eurymachos most of all, and to godlike Antinoös
I appeal, since the latter got it right when he said
that for now you should put the bow by, let the gods decide-
In the morning the god will confer the power where he wishes!
But come, give the polished bow to me, that here among you I may try out my hands and strength, see whether the force is still there, as when my limbs were supple, or whether
by now lack of care and vagrancy have destroyed it."
So he spoke, and they all expressed high indignation,
afraid as they were that he might string the polished bow. So Antinoös spoke in reproof, and addressed him, saying: "Ah, wretched stranger, devoid of even the slightest sense! Is it not enough for you that you dine at ease among us,
your betters, that you're barred from none of the feast, sit in on all our conversation, when there's no other stranger
or beggar who gets to listen to everything we say?
It's the wine, the honey-sweet wine, that damages you, just as
it harms anyone who swills it, who drinks to excess! It was wine
that infatuated the Centaur, far-famed Eurytion, in the hall of great-hearted Peirithoös, when he went
to visit the Lapiths: there, wits fuddled with wine, in his madness he wrought evil in Peirithoös' house.
Outraged, the heroes sprang on him, dragged him outside
through the forecourt, cut off his ears and nose
with the pitiless bronze; and he, now stupefied in mind,
went about with his unstable spirit bearing that fatal burden. Hence sprang the feud between the Centaurs and mankind; but he first for himself met trouble, when heavy with wine.
And for you I foresee great misery should you indeed
bend and string this bow: you'll find no courtesy here
in our district-we'll send you straight off in a black ship to King Echetos, maimer of all mortal men alive,
from whom you would have no escape. So now sit quiet,
drink your wine, don't contend with men younger than yourself."
Prudent Penelope responded to him, saying: "It's neither decent nor just, Antinoös, to deprive Telemachos' guests
-whoever may come to the house here-of their proper due! Do you expect, if this stranger, trusting his hands and strength,
strings the great bow of Odysseus, that he'll then take me
off to his home, and make me his bedfellow? I'm sure that he himself now nurses no such expectation!
So none of you need to worry on that account, or let it spoil your appetite here: that indeed would be unseemly."
Eurymachos, Polybos' son, then responded to her, saying:
"Ikarios' daughter, prudent Penelope, we don't think
this man will make off with you-yes, that would be unseemly!- but the gossip of men and women could embarrass us: some low Achaian lout may well later start saying this kind of thing:
'Oh yes, far weaker men now are courting the bedfellow
of a faultless man-they can't even string his polished bow! But some other fellow, a vagrant beggar, who turned up here strung the bow easily, and shot clear through the iron.'
So men will talk, and this would be a reproach to us all."
Then prudent Penelope once more responded to him, saying:
"Eurymachos, no way can good report spread in public about those who devour, and so dishonor, a nobleman's
household goods! Why make this, then, a matter for reproach?
The stranger's a very big fellow, and strongly built; he also
claims he's the son of a father of excellent ancestry.
So give him the polished bow now, and let's see what happens! For this I'll declare to you, and it shall come to pass:
y. See
if he does string the bow, and Apollo lets him triumph, I'll dress him in cloak and tunic, fine quality garments,
and give him a sharpened javelin, to ward off dogs and men,
and a double-edged sword, and sandals to strap on under his feet, and send him wherever his heart and spirit dictate."
Then sagacious Telemachos responded to her, saying:
"There's not one Achaian, my mother, more entitled than myself
to give, or refuse, this bow to whomsoever I please-
not any of those who hold power here on rugged Itháke, or lord it over the islands toward horse-pasturing Elis!
Of these none will thwart my will, even if I choose to make an outright gift of the bow, for this stranger to carry off !
Into the house with you now, attend to your own tasks-
the loom and the distaff ! And give orders to your handmaids
to stick to their proper work! The bow shall be men's business- all men's, but mine above all: in this house I hold the power."
Astonished, Penelope went back into the house,
and took to heart her son's sagacious remarks.
she climbed to her upper chamber with her handmaids, and there she wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until grey-eyed Athene shed sweet sleep upon her eyelids.
The noble swineherd now picked up the curved bow,
and was bearing it off; but the suitors all clamored in the hall,
and thus would one of the arrogant younger men exclaim: "Where, wretched swineherd, are you taking that curved bow? Are you crazy? The hunting dogs you bred yourself will soon wolf you down, all alone among your pigs, if Apollo
looks kindly upon us-he, and the other immortal gods."
So they spoke. Right there he dropped the bow where he stood, terrified: they were so many, the noise in the hall so loud.
But Telemachos shouted threateningly from the other side:
"Old fellow, keep on with the bow! Obey them, and you'll be sorry!
Though I'm younger than you I'll chase you out to the fields
with a shower of stones! At least I'm stronger than you! I only wish I was tougher, and a better man with my fists, than all the suitors arrayed here in these halls: then I'd soon send some of them packing from our house
in a dire state, because of the trouble they make here."
So he spoke, but the suitors all laughed cheerfully at him, forgetting the bitter resentment that they'd long nursed against Telemachos. The swineherd carried the bow through the hall to skillful Odysseus, placed it in his hands,
then summoned the nurse Eurykleia, and addressed her, saying:
"Orders for you from Telemachos, prudent Eurykleia:
you're to bar the close-fitted doors at the entrance to your quarters, and if any of you hear groans or the thud of falling
men here within our walls, they're not to go out, but remain
just where they are, keep silent, and go on with their work."
So he spoke; but her answer remained unwinged. She went and barred the doors of their pleasantly sited quarters, while Philoitios said nothing, but hurried out of the house, and barred the gates to the well-walled courtyard. Down
in the colonnade there lay coiled a shapely vessel's fiber cable: with this he secured the gates, and himself
went back in, sat down on the chair from which he'd risen, and watched Odysseus, who was already handling the bow, kept turning it round, made trial of it this way and that,
to see if worms had eaten the horn in its master's absence; and thus would an onlooker speak, with a glance at his neighbor:
"He must be a connoisseur, some kind of expert in bows! Either he himself has such fine bows stored back home, or else he intends to make one, the way he turns it about
this way and that-evildoer and vagrant that he is!"
And another of these haughty youths would speak up, saying: "I wish just as much good fortune for this old fellow
as he's likely to get in the contest for stringing the bow."
Such was the talk of the suitors. But resourceful Odysseus,
as soon as he'd got his great bow and viewed it all over-
just as a man, a professional lyre player and singer, will easily stretch the string around a new peg, secure the twisted sheep gut at either end, so now
Odysseus without hard effort strung the great bow,
and took it in his right hand, and tested the string,
which sang good and high at his touch, like a swallow's voice. The suitors were much distressed. The faces of them all changed color. Zeus thundered loudly, making plain his signs,
and much-enduring noble Odysseus now rejoiced
that sly-counselling Kronos' son had sent him an omen.
He picked up the swift shaft that lay there on the table, ready (the rest were still stored in their hollow quiver- those arrows that the Achaians were soon to experience), set it on the bow's hand grip, then-still seated
there in his chair-drew the string with the notched arrow,
took careful aim, and let fly. He did not miss one helve base of all the axes: clean through and out at the end
flew his bronze-heavy shaft. He addressed Telemachos, saying: "The stranger that sits in your hall, Telemachos, does you no
discredit: I neither missed the mark, nor spent
much labor on stringing the bow. My strength is still there- not gone, as these suitors insult me by claiming so mockingly! But now it's time to get dinner ready for the Achaians-
in daylight. And after that there's other entertainment,
songs and the lyre, the accompaniment to feasting."
Then godlike Odysseus signaled them with his eyebrows,
and his dear son Telemachos strapped on his keen-edged sword,and put out a hand to the spear, tipped with gleaming bronze, that was standing close to him, propped up beside his chair.


BOOK 22

Now resourceful Odysseus stripped himself of his rags and sprang up on the great threshold, taking the bow
and the shaft-packed quiver. He poured out the swift arrows there at his feet, and addressed the suitors, saying:
"This contest's over, decisively ended; and now
I'll go for another target, reached by no man hitherto, to see whether I can hit it, and Apollo grant me glory." He spoke, and then aimed a bitter shaft at Antinoös,
who was on the point of raising an elegant cup to his lips-
golden, twin-eared-had it in his hands, was intending
to drink wine from it: in his mind was no thought of death.
For who amid fellow feasters would ever imagine that one man, however strong, alone against many,
would contrive for him a bad death and black fate? But Odysseus
took aim and struck him in the throat with his arrow,
and clear through the tender neck the point was driven, and he slumped to one side, the cup dropped from his hand when he was hit, and up through his nostrils at once
came a thick spurt of human blood; a kick of his foot
sent the table flying, scattered all the food on the floor,
bread and roast meat in the dirt together. The suitors
made an uproar throughout the hall when they saw the man fallen: sprang from their seats, panic-stricken, in the hall, looking all round at the solid walls, but nowhere
was there a shield or strong spear that they could grab.
So they abused Odysseus in furious words, declaring:
"It's an outrage, stranger, for you to shoot men! You'll never compete in another contest! Now you've sealed your fate!
The man you killed was by far the noblest of the youths
on Itháke: because of that the vultures shall eat you here."
So said each of them, for indeed they supposed he'd not killed the man on purpose: poor fools, they had no notion that over them all the bonds of destruction were set.
Then, with an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus replied:
"You dogs, you thought that I'd never come home again
from the Trojans' land, the way you ravaged my house, and forcibly bedded my women servants, and while
I was still alive, underhandedly courted my wife, with no fear of the gods who own broad heaven,
or of any human reproof that might come hereafter!
Now over you all the bonds of destruction are set!"
So he spoke. Pale dread possessed them all: each man looked round for a way to escape from sheer destruction. Only Eurymachos now responded to him, saying:
"If you indeed are Odysseus, come home to Itháke, then
what you say about all the Achaians have done is just- many their wanton acts, here in the house, out afield! But the man lies dead who was to blame for it all- Antinoös! He it was who instigated these deeds,
not so much out of desire or need for the marriage,
but with a different aim, not fulfilled by Kronos' son: that over well-ordered Itháke he might himself
be king-and lie in wait for your son and kill him!
Now he's been fairly slain, spare these people: they are
your own! And hereafter we'll collect you reparation
for all that's been drunk or eaten here in this hall,
each man providing you with the worth of twenty oxen!
We'll requite you in bronze and gold until your heart is softened; but until that time comes no man could blame you for your anger."
Then. with an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus responded:
"Eurymachos, were you to give me all you had from your fathers, all that you now possess, plus what you could find elsewhere, not even so would I stay my hands from slaughter
until the suitors had paid the full price for their wrongdoing!
Now it's your choice whether you'll stand and fight me
or run-if anyone here can dodge death and its spirits;
but none of you, I think, will escape from sheer destruction." So he spoke: there and then their knees and hearts gave way. But Eurymachos now spoke again, and addressed them, saying:
"Friends, this man won't restrain his invincible hands!
Now he's got control of the polished bow and its quiver he'll shoot from the smooth-worn threshold until he's killed every last one of us! We must think about how to fight him!
So draw your swords now, hold the tables in front of you
against his swift deadly arrows, and then let's all go for him
in a body, try to shift him from the threshold and doorway, then get to the city, raise a quick hue and cry. Do that,
and this fellow will soon have shot his last shaft."
So saying, he now unsheathed his sharp sword, fashioned of bronze,
with its double edge, and made for Odysseus, yelling out
his fearsome war cry. At the same instant noble Odysseus let fly another arrow. The swift shaft struck his breast
under the nipple, drove into his liver. He dropped his sword on the ground, and fell, doubled up and sprawling, over
the table: the food all went flying to the ground, along with
his two-handled cup. His forehead smashed agonizingly into the ground; both feet kicked out at his chair, dislodging it. A mist closed down over his eyes.
Amphinomos next attacked renowned Odysseus, charging
straight at him, keen-edged sword ready and drawn, to see
if he could force him back from the doorway. Telemachos
was too quick, aimed from behind with his bronze-tipped spear, and hit him between the shoulders, drove right through
his breast. He fell with a thud, hit the ground forehead first.
But Telemachos sprang back, left his far-shadowing spear
there in Amphinomos, much afraid that some Achaian-
while he was busy prising that long spear loose-might rush up and give him a sword thrust, catch him still stooping. So he
set off at a run, quickly reached his dear father, stood close
and addressed him with winged words, saying: "Father,
I'll go now and fetch you a shield and a couple of spears, and an all-bronze helmet, close-fitting at the temples.
I'll arm myself too while I'm gone, and get arms for the swineherd and the cowherd too: for sure, to be in armor is better."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"Run, fetch them, while I still have arrows for my defense, lest they force me away from the doors, all alone as I am."
So he spoke, and Telemachos, in obedience to his father,
made his way to the storeroom where their fine arms were kept,
and from there collected four shields, eight spears, and four
bronze-plated helmets, decked with thick crests of horsehair. Carrying these, he quickly returned to his dear father.
Then, first, he armored his own body in bronze,
and the two servants likewise put on their splendid gear,
and stood there flanking clever, subtle-minded Odysseus.
He, while he still had arrows for his defense, went after the suitors, one by one, never stopping, there in his house, aiming, then shooting. They kept falling, thick and fast. But when the master had no more arrows to shoot,
the bow he propped up against the pleasantly sited hall's
doorpost, to stand by the bright inner walls. He now slung from his shoulders a fourfold shield, and on his powerful head next settled a well-made helmet
with a horsehair plume nodding fearsomely up above,
and took two sturdy spears, both tipped with bronze.
There existed a side postern set in the solid wall,
flush with the top of the pleasantly sited hall's threshold, that led into a corridor and had a close-fitting door.
On this corridor Odysseus ordered the noble swineherd
to keep a close watch (one man only could rush it at a time),
since Agelaös had called out to all the suitors, saying: "Friends, won't one of you now slip out by that side postern, get word to the people, raise a quick hue and cry? Do that, and this fellow will soon have taken his last shot."
Then Melanthios, herder of goats, responded to him, saying:
"That won't work, Agelaös, Zeus' nursling: the fine courtyard doors are dangerously close, and the corridor is narrow:
one man, if a good fighter, could hold off all comers. So let me go fetch armor for us to put on, from his private storeroom;
for that, I'm certain, and no place else, is where
Odysseus and his illustrious son have stowed their gear."
So saying, Melanthios, herder of goats, went up
by the steps of the hall to the storerooms of Odysseus.From there he took twelve shields, and a dozen spears,
and as many bronze helmets with thick horsehair crests,
and made his way back, and quickly gave them to the suitors. Then Odysseus' knees and courage both wilted as he saw them girding themselves in armor and brandishing long spears
in their hands, and huge his task now appeared to him,
and at once he addressed Telemachos with winged words, saying:
"Telemachos, it must be one of the women in the halls
is backing this bad fight against us-or maybe Melanthios."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"I myself, father, made the mistake here-no one else
is to blame! It was I who left the close-fitting door
of the storeroom ajar: they kept a sharper watch than I did! You go now, noble Eumaios, and shut that storeroom door, and see if it's one of the women who's behind this, or,
as I suspect, Melanthios, Dolios' son."
Such was
the conversation between them, one to the other.
But Melanthios, herder of goats, went back to the storeroom to fetch more fine armor. The noble swineherd saw him,
and at once addressed Odysseus, close by him, saying: "Scion of Zeus, Laërtes' son, resourceful Odysseus,
there's that dangerous busybody-the one we ourselves
suspect-off back to the storeroom! So tell me truthfully, am I to kill the man, if I prove the better fighter,
or bring him here to you, to pay for the misdemeanors, all of them, that he's committed here in your house?"
To him
Resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying: "For sure,
I and Telemachos will hold off these haughty suitors,
keep them shut in the hall here, however hard they struggle! You two should force both that man's hands and feet behind his back, lash them to boards there, dump him
into the storeroom, attach a braided rope to his body,
hoist him up the tall column until he's near the roof beams: that way he'll stay alive longest and suffer real agony."
So he spoke. They listened carefully and obeyed him.
To the storeroom they went, unnoticed by the man inside, who was searching for armor far in the back. The two
lay in wait for him, standing on either side of the doorway. When Melanthios, herder of goats, was crossing the threshold- in one hand a splendid helmet, and in the other
an old broad shield, that was all befouled with mildew
and belonged to the hero Laërtes, who'd carried it when young,
but it had long been laid up, the seams of its straps were rotted- the two sprang, seized him, dragged him in by his hair,
flung him down, sore anguished at heart, on the ground.
They lashed his hands and feet tight with agonizing bonds, forcing them right behind his back, exactly the way
that Laërtes' son, much-enduring noble Odysseus
had told them to do. They attached a braided rope to his body,
and hauled him up the tall column until he was near the roof beams. Then, swineherd Eumaios, you made mock of him, saying:
"This way, Melanthios, you'll keep watch the whole night,
lying there on the kind of soft bed that's proper for you;
nor shall Dawn, early risen, coming up from Ocean's streams in gold-throned splendor escape your notice as you
bring the suitors your she-goats to set up a feast in the hall."
So he was left there, stretched tight in his deadly bonds, while the two put on their armor, closed the bright door, and made their way back to clever, subtle-minded Odysseus. There they stood on the threshold, breathing courage,
four men against a crowd of good fighters in the feast hall.
Then Zeus' daughter Athene came up close to them,
assuming the likeness of Mentor, in both voice and person. Odysseus rejoiced at the sight of her, and addressed her, saying:
"Mentor, defend us from harm, remember your dear comrade who used to do you good turns: you and I are the same age."
So he spoke: but he guessed it was Athene the host-rallier.
The suitors across from him made an uproar in the hall
and the first to rebuke Athene was Damastor's son Agelaös: "Mentor, don't let Odysseus sidetrack you with his glib talk into fighting against the suitors and giving aid to him!
For this is how I think our purpose will be accomplished:
when we kill these men, both father and son, you too
will be slain along with them, for the deeds you're so eager
to perform in these halls: with your own head you'll pay for them! And when with the bronze we've stripped you of your violence,
all the possessions you have, whether indoor or outside,
we'll add to those of Odysseus! We won't let your sons live in your halls, nor grant your daughters or your good wife the right to move freely about Itháke."
So he spoke, and Athene grew even more furious at heart,
and upbraided Odysseus with angry words: "No longer
is your courage steadfast, Odysseus, nor that fine prowess you showed when over Helen-high-born, white-armed- for nine years you fought the Trojans unceasingly,
and many fighters you killed in that dread conflict-
it was your advice brought down Priam's broad-wayed city!
Why then now, when you're back to home and possessions, do you wail at the thought of facing up to the suitors?
So come here, my friend, stand beside me, watch me at work, and see the way, when up against hostile fighters,
that Alkimos' son Mentor repays your good services!"
She spoke, yet still did not give him enough strength to prevail in his battle, was still making trial of the might and valor
both of Odysseus himself and of his illustrious son.
And now she flew up to a roof beam of the smoky hall
and perched there in plain view, in the likeness of a swallow.
Agelaös, Damastor's son, was now urging the suitors on, with Eurynomos, Amphimedon, Demoptolemos, Peisandros, Polyktor's son, and skillful Polybos;
for these were by far the most valiant of the suitors
who were still alive and fighting for their survival: the pick
of the rest had already fallen to the bow and constant arrows.Agelaös then spoke among them, addressing them all: "My friends, this man by now must surely hold up his invincible hands!
After all those empty boasts his friend Mentor's deserted him,
and they're left by themselves there at the outer doorway!
So don't now throw your long spears at them all together, but you six throw first, see whether Zeus will maybe grant that Odysseus be hit, and we win the glory-
once he's fallen, there's no need to worry about the others."
So he spoke. They all threw their spears as he suggested,
with force; but Athene made all their efforts unsuccessful. One of them hit a doorpost of the well-built feast hall,
a second the close-fitting door itself; another's bronze-weighted ash spear ended up against the wall.
So when the suitors' spears had missed them, much-enduring
Odysseus at once addressed them, saying: "My friends, this, I'd say, is the moment for us too now to hurl
our own spears into the thick of these suitors, who are so eager to kill and strip us, on top of their earlier misdemeanors."
So he spoke, and they all now threw their keen-edged spears
with careful aim. Odysseus hit Demoptolemos; Telemachos, Euryades; the swineherd, Elatos; while the cowherd who cared for the cattle killed Peisandros.
These then all together bit the wide earth with their teeth,
and the suitors retreated to the innermost part of the hall,
while the others rushed forward and pulled their spears from the dead.
Then once more the suitors threw their keen-edged spears with force,but Athene made their efforts mostly unsuccessful. one of them hit a doorpost of the well-built feast hall,
a second the close-fitting door itself; another's
bronze-weighted ash spear ended up against the wall.
but Amphimedon hit Telemachos on the arm at his wrist, a glancing blow, the bronze scraping the surface of the skin,
and Ktesippos with his long spear grazed Eumaios' shoulder
above his shield, but the spear flew on, ended in the ground.
Then once more those with the sharp and subtle-minded Odysseus flung their own keen-edged spears into the thick of the suitors, and once more Odysseus, city-sacker, scored a hit,
on Eurydamas; Telemachos on Amphimedon; the swineherd
on Polybos, while the herder of cattle struck Ktesippos
square in the breast, and boasted over him, saying: "Polytherses' son, insult-fancier, nevermore, ever, again thoughtlessly talk big, but leave any kind of comment
to the gods, since they are far mightier! Here is a guest-gift
for you, a return for that ox hoof you lately presented to godlike Odysseus, on his begging round in the house."
So spoke the crumple-horned cattle's herder; but Odysseus now wounded Damastor's son with his long spear, close up, and Telemachos wounded Leokritos, Euenor's son,
with a spear in the nether belly, drove the bronze through: he fell prone, hitting the ground squarely with his forehead.
Then Athene held up her aegis, the destroyer of mortals, from on high in the roof: the suitors were terrified,
and stampeded through the hall like a herd of cows
that the darting gadfly descends on and drives to distraction
in the season of spring, when the days are lengthening;
and just as vultures, with crooked talons and hooked beaks, come out from the mountains and swoop down on other birds, that fly fast over the plain, and avoid the clouds, but still
the vultures pounce and destroy them: they have no defense
or way of escape, and men enjoy watching the hunt- so now did they harry the suitors throughout the hall, striking them right and left, and hideous cries went up
as their heads were cracked, and the whole floor ran with blood.
Leiodes rushed forward and clasped Odysseus' knees
and with winged words entreated him, saying: "I beg you by your knees, Odysseus, respect me and pity me! Never, I tell you, have I offended any woman here in your halls
by improper word or deed: in fact I did my best
to stop any other suitor who began to behave that way!
But they took no notice, wouldn't restrain their hands from mischief, and through such wanton misconduct have met a ghastly fate.
Yet I, their soothsayer, who have done no wrong, will die along with them: there's no gratitude for benefits received!"
With an angry glance, resourceful Odysseus responded, saying:
"If, as you claim, you in fact are their soothsayer, then surely many times you'll have made a prayer in my halls that the end of a sweet homecoming might be kept far from me, that you might be the one with whom my dear wife went, bore children!
For that you won't escape a most bitter death."
So saying, he seized in his sturdy hand a sword that lay nearby:
Agelaös had dropped it at the moment when he was killed. With this sword Odysseus now slashed through Leiodes' neck. The man was still speaking as his head rolled in the dust.
Terpes' son too, the minstrel, was still trying to avoid black fate-
Phemios, who was compelled to perform among the suitors. He now stood holding the clear-toned lyre in his hands, close to the postern door, uncertain in his mind
whether to slip from the hall and sit at the well-built altar
of Zeus of Enclosures, on which Laërtes and Odysseus
had burnt in his honor so many thighs of oxen,
or whether to run to Odysseus, entreat him at his knees.
And as he reflected, it struck him that this was the better course: to run up and clasp the knees of Laërtes' son Odysseus.
So he laid down his hollow lyre upon the floor
between the mixing-bowl and his silver-studded chair,
and himself ran forward and clasped Odysseus by the knees, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "By your knees I entreat you, Odysseus! Respect me and pity me! On you
hereafter shall sorrow be laid, if you choose to kill a minstrel
such as I am, who performs for both gods and mankind! I am self-taught, but the god has planted in my heart lays of all kinds: I'm equipped to perform before you
as I would for a god-so don't be too ready to cut my throat!
Telemachos too, your dear son, could testify to the fact
that it was against my will, with no desire on my part,
that I came to your house to sing for the suitors at their feasts- they were stronger, and far more of them: they made me come." So he spoke. Telemachos, princely in power, heard him,
and at once he addressed his nearby father, saying:
"Whatever you do, don't maim this innocent man with the bronze!
Let's also spare Medon the herald, who used to look after me here in our house while I was still a child-that is,
if Philoitios or the swineherd hasn't already killed him,
or he ran into you when you were storming through the house."
So he spoke, and Medon, sagacious at heart, overheard him. He'd ducked down under a chair, and wrapped himself in the fresh-flayed hide of an ox, trying to avoid black fate.
At once he got up from the chair, quickly threw off the oxhide,
rushed forward, clasped Telemachos by the knees,
and uttering winged words then entreated him, saying: "Friend, here I am, it is I! Stay your hand, speak to your father, lest in his great strength he hurt me with the sharp bronze while incensed against these men, the suitors, who wasted
his goods here in his halls, and-the fools!-paid you no honor."
But resourceful Odysseus smiled, and then addressed him, saying: "Relax! Telemachos here has protected you and saved you,
so you may know in your heart, and pass the word to others, how much better kind actions are than mean ones! But for now
leave the feast hall, go sit down outside in the courtyard,
away from the slaughter, you and the lay-rich minstrel, until I've finished the work I need to do here indoors."
So he spoke. The two now went off, out of the feast hall, and sat themselves down by great Zeus' altar, glancing
in all directions, still half-expecting to be murdered.
Odysseus too looked around, in his domain, to see whether any man, still alive, was hiding, in an effort to dodge black fate. But what he saw was each one of them in the blood and dust- the whole crowd, fallen, dead, like fish that fishermen
have drawn in their fine-meshed net up from the grey sea
onto some crescent beach, and they all are lying there heaped up on the sand, sorely missing the waves of the sea; but Helios, the bright sun, now heats the life out of them- just so the suitors all lay there, heaped up upon one another.
Resourceful Odysseus now addressed Telemachos, saying: "Telemachos, go and summon the nurse Eurykleia to me:
There's something I have on my mind that I need to say to her."
So he spoke, and Telemachos, in obedience to his father, went and opened the door, and called to Eurykleia, saying:
"Up with you now, old woman-you who are in charge of all the serving women we have in our hall-come here!
My father is calling for you, he wants to say something to you."
So he spoke. Her own word remained unwinged: she opened the doors of the well-built feast hall, and came out, Telemachos
leading the way before her. She found Odysseus
standing amid the bodies of the men he had killed, bespattered with blood and gore, like a lion that's come from the farmstead where it's been feeding on an ox, and all its breast and its jowls on either side are beslobbered
with blood, so that it is a terrible sight to behold-
just so was Odysseus bespattered, hands and feet alike.
But she, on beholding the corpses and the widespread bloodshed, began a cry of triumph, for the mighty deed she saw;
but Odysseus stopped her, cut short her enthusiasm,
and uttering winged words, addressed her, saying:
"Keep your joy to yourself, old woman-don't exult aloud! It's not decent to vaunt over men that have been killed.
These dead were destroyed by divine fate and their own dastardly acts: they honored no mortals on this earth,
either high or low, of those that came among them,
and so through their wanton deeds they met a sorry end. Now tell me about the women in this household-both those whose conduct dishonors me, and those that are innocent."
Then his dear nurse Eurykleia responded to him, saying:
"Very well, my child: I'll tell you the truth of the matter.
Fifty women there are that live here in your halls, handmaids we taught to perform their various tasks, carding the wool while enduring a lifetime of servitude:
of these there are twelve who chose the path of shamelessness,
showing no respect for me or Penelope herself-
Telemachos, though, only lately came of age: his mother hasn't allowed him control over the women servants.
But now, please, let me go to that bright upper chamber
and break the news to your wife, whom some god's kept asleep."
To her resourceful Odysseus then responded, saying:
"No, don't wake her yet. But go and tell those women
who've been guilty of shameful behavior to come in here, to me."
So he spoke. The old woman went out through the hall
to bring the women his message, and order them to come;
while Odysseus summoned Telemachos, as well as the cowherd
and swineherd, and addressed them with winged words, saying: 
"Start removing the corpses now. Get the women to help you.
Then have them clean off these elegant chairs and tables, 
washing them down with water, using porous sponges.
When you've put the whole hall in proper order, then
take these maidservants out of the well-built hall, to a spot
midway between the round house and the courtyard's flawless wall, and cut them up with your long sharp swords till you've taken
the life from them all and they've forgotten their Aphrodisiac
pleasures under the suitors, lying with them clandestinely."
As he spoke, the women arrived in a body, all sobbing desperately, all shedding big tears. So first of all
they bore out the bodies of the slain, and stacked them under the colonnade of the well-walled courtyard,
propped up against one another, while Odysseus directed
their work himself, hurrying them. They were forced to carry the corpses. Then they cleaned off the elegant chairs and tables, washing them down with water, using porous sponges.
Telemachos meanwhile, with the cowherd and the swineherd,
scraped off the floor of the close-built house with shovels,
and the women collected the scrapings, deposited them outside. Then, when they'd put the whole hall in proper order,
they took the maidservants out of that well-built hall, to a spot midway between the round house and the courtyard's flawless wall,
and shut them in a tight corner, with no possible escape.
Sagacious Telemachos now spoke first to the others, saying: "A clean death isn't the way by which I want to end
these women's lives: they poured insults on my own head
and my mother's too, all while they were sleeping with the suitors."
So he spoke, and taking the cable of a dark-prowed vessel,
hitched one end to a tall pillar, the other about the round house, stretching it high, so no woman could touch the ground with
her feet.
As when long-winged thrushes or doves are caught in the snare that's been set for them in a thicket, as they're flying back
to their roosts, and hateful the bed that now welcomes them,
these women's heads bobbed in a line, and round their necks nooses were set for all, to give them most piteous deaths: they jerked with their feet a little, but not for long.
Then they brought Melanthios out, through the forecourt and yard,
and cut off his nose and ears with the pitiless bronze,
and ripped out his private parts for the dogs to eat raw, and in their fury chopped off his hands and his feet.
That done, they washed their own hands and feet, and went into the house to Odysseus, and their work was over.
But he now addressed his dear nurse Eurykleia, saying:
"Bring sulfur, old woman, that cleanses pollution, and bring me fire, to make fumes that will purge the hall; then tell
Penelope to come down now, she and her handmaids,
and have all the women servants in the house assemble here."
Then his dear nurse Eurykleia responded to him, saying:
"Yes indeed, my child, all this you've requested is in order. But please, let me bring you a mantle and tunic to wear- don't stand like that in your hall with your broad shoulders clad only in rags: that would be just cause for censure."
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to her, saying: "First of all, see that a fire is lit for me in the hall."
So he spoke; and his dear nurse Eurykleia did not disregard him, but fetched fire and sulfur; and Odysseus thoroughly purified hall and house and courtyard. Then
the old woman went back through Odysseus' fine domain
to bring word to the women, and order them to assemble; and out they came from their quarters, torches in their hands, and crowded round Odysseus, and embraced him,
and clasped and kissed his head and his hands and shoulders
in affectionate greeting, and a sweet longing possessed him
for crying and tears: each one of them was familiar to him.


BOOK 23

Chuckling, the old woman ascended to the upper chamber,
to bring her mistress the news that her dear husband was there, in the house: her feet hobbled, but her knees moved briskly, and she stood at Penelope's head, and addressed her, saying:
"Wake up, Penelope, dear child, so you may see
with your own eyes what you've longed for all this time! Odysseus is here, back at last, late though his return!
He's slaughtered the haughty suitors who were preying on his household, devouring his property, bullying his son!"
Then prudent Penelope responded to her, saying:
"Dear granny, the gods have crazed you-those who are able to change even the sharpest-witted into a nitwit, or take
a halfwit and set him well on the road to wisdom!
It's they who've crazed you-you, who were once so sensible!
Why do you mock me thus, when my heart's full of sorrow,
talking in that wild way, arousing me from sleep-
sweet sleep, that bound me fast, enfolded my eyelids? Never have I slept so soundly since that day when Odysseus
left to set eyes on ill Ilion-that unspeakable name!
Off with you now, back down to the women's quarters-
and if any other woman, of all those who belong to me, had come to me with this story, and woken me up, for sure I'd have quickly sent her packing, back downstairs,
in a way she'd regret! But here your old age shall save you."
Eurykleia, loyal nurse, then responded to her, saying:
"Dear child, I'm not mocking you! What I said is the truth! Odysseus is here, back home, exactly as I informed you:
the stranger that all the men were insulting in the feast hall- that's him! Telemachos learned who he was a while back,
but he was discreet, kept his father's plans well hidden
till he could punish the violence of these overbearing men."
So she spoke. Rejoicing, Penelope sprang from her bed,
and hugged the old woman, shedding tears from her eyelids,
and, uttering winged words, addressed her, saying:
"Come now, dear granny, please will you tell me truly,
if he's in fact come back home, as you say, how he contrived to lay hands on this crowd of shameless suitors-alone, while they always stay together when they're in this house."
Eurykleia, loyal nurse, then responded to her, saying:
"I neither saw nor was told of it. I only heard the groaning
of men being killed. We sat, terrified, at the back
of our well-built quarters, behind the close-fitting doors, until your son came in from the hall and called us-
his father had sent Telemachos over to fetch us out.
I found Odysseus standing among the slaughtered corpses:
they lay all around him, filled the hard-trodden floor,
heaped on each other. To see him would have warmed your heart- all bespattered with blood and gore, like a lion, he was!
All the bodies are now collected at the gates of the courtyard,
in one pile, and he's purifying his fine home with sulfur,
after kindling a large fire. He's sent me to summon you. So come, that the hearts of you both may enter upon true happiness, after all the troubles that you've endured! Now at long last what you hoped for has been fulfilled:
he's come back himself, alive, to his own hearth, and found
both you and his son in his halls. As for those who mistreated him, the suitors, he's been revenged on all of them in his house!"
Then prudent Penelope responded to her, saying: "Dear granny, don't laugh out loud, don't exult in triumph over them yet:
you know how welcome his appearance here in these halls
would be to us all, but most to me, and the son born to us. But this is no true account, the way you tell it: no,
some immortal's slaughtered the haughty suitors, in wrath at their heartbreaking wantonness and their wicked deeds;
for they had no respect for any dwellers upon this earth
whether high or low, whoever might come among them;
so they've come to grief through their own mad folly. But Odysseus has lost, far away, his return to Achaia-and his life."
Eurykleia, loyal nurse, then responded to her, saying:
"My child, what's this word that's escaped the barrier of your teeth,
saying your husband-who's here, by the hearth downstairs!-
will never return home? Your heart's always so mistrustful! Look, here's another clear proof that I'll now tell you: the scar from that wound the white tusk of a boar dealt him long ago:
I saw it while washing his feet, and wanted to break the news
to you yourself, but he put his hand over my mouth
and in his great shrewdness of mind wouldn't let me tell you. So come with me now, and I'll put my own life at hazard:
if I'm deceiving you, kill me, in the most painful manner!"
To her prudent Penelope responded, saying: "Dear granny,
it's hard for you to fathom the thoughts of the gods eternal, however intelligent you may be. Even so,
let's go down and join my son, for me to see these men, the suitors, dead, and whoever it was that killed them."
So saying, she set off downstairs, debating in her heart
whether to keep at a distance from-her own dear husband? or rather go to him, clasp his head and hands and kiss them? But when she'd come in, passing over the stone threshold, she sat down facing Odysseus, in the light from the fire,
by the opposite wall. He was sitting against a tall pillar,
looking down, and waiting to see if his comely bedfellow
would make any comment when she'd had a good look at him. But she sat long in silence, heart possessed by wonder,
now with her eyes scrutinizing his face intensely,
then failing to recognize him in the mean rags he wore.
Telemachos took her to task, and addressed her, saying:
"Mother, my cruel mother, so unyielding at heart,
why do you thus hold back from my father? Why not sit beside him, interrogate him, ask him questions?
No other woman would thus, with obdurate heart,
hold aloof from a husband who, much hardship suffered, had, in the twentieth year, come back to his own country; but your heart is always harder than any stone."
To him Prudent Penelope now responded, saying: "My child,
the heart in my breast is lost in wonder, I cannot
find words with which to address or question him, or look him straight in the face. But if in actual truth
he's Odysseus, come back home, then undoubtedly we two
possess better ways of recognizing each other:
signs known only to us-no one else has access to them."
So she spoke. Noble much-enduring Odysseus smiled,
and at once addressed Telemachos with winged words, saying: "Telemachos, let your mother now make trial of me here,
in my own domain: soon enough she'll understand much better.
But at present, because I'm filthy, and clad in mean clothing,
she treats me with disrespect, won't yet say I am he.
For now, we need to consider how best to settle matters. A man who's killed only a single soul in his district,
even one without many to avenge him when he's gone,
still flees into exile, abandoning kin and country;
but we've slain the city's mainstay, the very noblest
of the youths on Itháke: this you need to bear in mind."
Sagacious Telemachos then responded to him, saying: "Look to it yourself, dear father: they say yours is the best
counsel of all mankind, that there's no other mortal,
not one living person, that could compete with you!
As for us, we'll follow you eagerly, and I don't think we'll fall short in prowess, insofar as we have the power."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"So, I shall tell you the best course as I see it.
First all go and wash yourselves, then put on tunics,
and tell the maids in their quarters to choose their dresses, and let the godlike minstrel with his clear-toned lyre
act as our leader in the pleasures of dancing,
so that any person outside who hears the sounds-
a neighbor or passerby-will assume it's a wedding-feast.
That way the news of the slaughter of these suitors
won't spread abroad through the district before we've gone out to our wooded farmstead, where we can then
establish whatever advantage the Olympian may grant us."
So he spoke. They all were listening, and readily obeyed him. First they went and washed and put on their tunics,
and the women decked themselves out, and the godlike minstrel took up his hollow lyre, and aroused a longing in them
for the pleasures of song and fine dancing. So the great hall
resounded all about with the noise made by the feet
of dancing men, and well-dressed women, and thus
might a person outside the house who heard them declare: "For sure, someone must have married the much-wooed queen!
Hard-hearted she was, had no stomach to keep her wedded
husband's domain right through, until he returned."
So they'd say, but knew nothing of the events that had in fact taken place. So now great-hearted Odysseus was washed in his own house by his housekeeper, Eurynome: she massaged him with oil,
and dressed him in an elegant mantle and a tunic,
while over his body Athene shed an abundance of beauty, making him taller and sturdier, and from his pate
she conjured hair, thick and curling, like the hyacinth blossom. As happens when some craftsman overlays silver with gold-
an expert, to whom Hephaistos and Pallas Athene have taught
every kind of technique, to embellish the works he creates- so she now shed grace over his head and shoulders,
and he came from the bath in appearance like the immortals, and sat down again on the chair from which he'd risen,
facing his wife; and he then addressed her, saying:
"Strange lady, to you, beyond all womankind, those
who make their home on Olympos have given a stubborn spirit!
No other woman would thus, with obdurate heart
hold aloof from the husband who, much hardship suffered,
had, in the twentieth year, come back to his own country!
Well, granny, spread me a bed, so that I can settle down here by myself, for the heart in her breast is of iron."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying:
"Strange sir, I'm being neither haughty nor indifferent,
nor am I oversurprised. I know well what you looked like
when you sailed from Itháke in that long-oared ship of yours. Come then, Eurykleia, make up the solid bedstead for him, outside the well-built bedroom that he himself constructed! There set the solid bedstead, and put bedding on it-
fleeces, blankets, bright coverlets."
So she spoke,
making trial of her husband. But Odysseus in response burst out in anger, and addressed his true wife, saying:
"Woman, this word you've said embitters my heart!
Who's moved my bed elsewhere? A hard job that would be, even for a skilled worker, unless some god came down
in person, and chose to shift it: easy enough for him! But of mortals no man alive, however young and strong, could dislodge it, for a great token was embodied
in the bed that I fashioned-I, and no other man! There was
a small long-leafed olive-tree that grew there in the courtyard,
flourishing, in its prime. Its girth was like a pillar. Round this I built our chamber, till it was finished, with close-set stones, and a sound roof overhead,
and dovetailed doors I added, made to fit closely; then
I lopped off the foliage of the long-leafed olive, trimmed
the trunk from the root up, made it smooth it with a bronze adze, well and expertly, shaped it true to the line,
making it into a bedpost, bored holes in it with my auger. Beginning with that, I worked till I'd finished the whole bed,
adorned it with inlays-gold, silver, ivory-then latticed
the bed frame with thongs of oxhide, dyed bright purple.
Thus I describe this token to you-though I've no idea
if this bed of mine's still in place, wife, or whether by now some man's severed the olive's trunk, and moved it elsewhere."
So he spoke. Her knees and heart were undone on the spot, since well she knew the sure tokens that Odysseus had described.
Then she ran straight to him in tears, and flung her arms about his neck, kissed his face, and addressed him, saying: "Don't be angry with me, Odysseus! In all other matters
you've been the wisest of men-the gods it was brought us grief,
begrudging that we two should remain one with the other, enjoy our joint life together from youth to the brink of old age.
But please don't now get cross or take me to task because
at first sight I didn't, as now, give you a loving welcome! The heart in my breast was always terrified lest some man
might turn up here, beguile me with his specious story- many there are who scheme for their own low profit!
Not even Argive Helen, Zeus' progeny, would have coupled in love and bed with that foreigner had she but known
the Achaians' warlike sons were going to fetch her back
to her own home and country. In her case a god
incited her to commit her improper act: not till then did she put in her mind that ghastly act of mad folly, that first brought such grief upon us as well. But now-
since you've already recounted, clear and plain, the tokens
of this bed of ours, seen by no other living mortal except you and me alone, and one solitary handmaid,
Aktor's daughter, a gift from my father, before I came here, the doorkeeper of our close-built bridal chamber now-
you've convinced my heart, all too stubborn though it was."
So she spoke, and stirred in his heart yet more the urge to cry, and he wept as he held in his arms his loyal beloved wife,
and welcome as is the appearance of dry land to men swimming, men whose strong ship Poseidon has wrecked out on the deep,
as it's driven on by the gale and the cresting waves,
and few have made it to land out of the grey salt sea
by swimming, and thick is the brine that's crusted on their bodies, and glad they are to have got ashore, and escaped disaster-
so welcome to her was her husband as she looked upon him,
never relaxing the hold of her white arms round his neck.
Indeed, rosy-fingered Dawn would have risen while they wept had the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, not planned things otherwise.
The night's last stage she prolonged, while holding up golden-throned Dawn at Ocean, and not permitting her
to yoke up her swift-footed horses, bringing light to mankind-
Phaethon and Lampos, the colts that draw Dawn's chariot.
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed his wife, saying: "Not yet have we reached the conclusion, my wife, of all our trials: there's a measureless task still awaiting us in the future,
both long and hard: I need to accomplish this in full.
That's what the ghost of Teiresias prophesied to me on the day I ventured down into the realm of Hades
to enquire about my comrades' homecoming, and my own.
But come, my wife, let's to bed, so that now, at last, soothed
by sweet sleep, we may find our joy and comfort together."
Then prudent Penelope responded to him, saying: "Your bed shall be ready for you whenever your heart is so inclined, now the gods have managed your return to your well-built home, and to your native country:
but since you've thought of this, and a god's put it in your mind,
tell me what this trial is-I fancy I'll learn its nature soon enough: no bad thing to know of it in advance."
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to her, saying:
"Strange lady, why do you now so urgently want me
to tell you this? Well, I'll do so, I'll keep nothing secret.
But your heart will get no joy of it, nor am I myself happy about it. Teiresias said I must travel to numerous
cities of men, while holding a well-shaped oar in my hands, until I come among men who know nothing of the sea,
who eat their food without flavoring it with salt
and have never set eyes on ships with purple cheeks or on the well-shaped oars that serve as a ship's wings;
and he told me a manifest sign, one that wouldn't escape me: when on the road I encounter another man who believes
what I have on my sturdy shoulder is a winnowing-fan,
I'm to fix my well-shaped oar on end in the ground, and offer a lavish sacrifice to the lord Poseidon-
a ram, a bull, and a stud boar that mounts its sows.
I then must come back home, make rich sacred offerings
to the immortal gods who possess broad heaven,
in due order. Death will come to me from the sea, the gentlest of ends, that will take me only when
I've worn out a sleek old age, with my people round me prospering. All of this, he told me, would come to pass."
Prudent Penelope then responded to him, saying:
"If indeed the gods are allowing you a better old age,
then there's hope that we'll get a chance to escape our troubles."
Such was the conversation between them. All this while the nurse and Eurynome were making up their bed
with soft bedclothes, under the light of flaming torches; and when they'd hastily readied the solid bedstead,
the old nurse went off to sleep in her own quarters,
while Eurynome, maid of the bedchamber, conducted them on their way to bed, holding a torch on her hand.
After escorting them there she too retired, while they happily rediscovered the world of their old-time bed.
Telemachos and the cowherd and the swineherd now
stopped their feet from dancing, stopped the women too, and lay down to sleep themselves, in the shadowy halls.
When the couple had had their fill of passionate lovemaking,
they got pleasure from conversation, chatting to one another. She, bright among women, told of all she'd borne in the halls, having to watch the destructive crowd of suitors, those who, with her as excuse, had slaughtered many cattle and fat sheep,
while too much wine was drawn from the storage jars; while he,
Zeus-born Odysseus, recounted all the woes he'd inflicted on others, and all he'd endured with pain himself;
and she heard him out with delight, and sweet sleep never was shed on her eyelids until his whole tale was told.
He began with how he'd first overcome the Kikones,
then came to the rich terrain of the lotus-eating men;
and all that the Kyklops did, and the price he made him pay for those of his sturdy comrades he'd pitilessly devoured;
and then how he came to Aiolos, who readily welcomed him,
and gave him conveyance-but he was not yet fated to reach
his own land: once again the storm wind snatched him up and bore him, heavily groaning, over the fish-rich deep; then how he'd come to Telepylos, where the Laistrygonians destroyed his ships and all his well-greaved comrades,
Odysseus alone escaping in his black ship. He next
recounted all of Kirke's deceits and contrivances,
how he'd gone in his many-oared ship to Hades' dank domain, to consult the spirit of Theban Teiresias; and how
there he'd seen every one of his former companions,
besides the mother who bore him, and nursed him as a child;
how he'd heard the voice of the Sirens, unceasing singers;
how he'd come to the Wandering Rocks, and to dread Charybdis and Skylle, from whom till then no man had escaped unscathed; and how his comrades had slaughtered the cattle of Helios;
and how his swift ship had been struck by a smoldering bolt
from high-thundering Zeus, and his fine comrades died together, all of them: he alone got clear of the grim death spirits;
how he came to the isle of Ogygia and the nymph Kalypso, who kept him there, longing to have him as her husband,
in her hollow caves, and looked after him, and declared
she would make him immortal and ageless all his days,
yet never could win over the heart in his breast; and how after many hardships endured he reached the Phaiakians, who treated him with high honor, as though he were a god,
and conveyed him home in a ship to his native country
with presents of bronze and gold and apparel. This concluded the tale as he told it and was when sweet limb-loosening sleep sprang on him, dissolving his heart's anxieties.
The grey-eyed goddess Athene now had another idea.
When she figured Odysseus had had his fill of pleasure
from bedding his wife and sleeping, she at once aroused from Ocean the Dawn, early risen and golden-throned, to bring light to mankind; and now Odysseus arose from his soft bed, and gave a charge to Penelope, saying:
"My wife, by now we've had a surfeit of endless trials,
both of us, you here weeping over my troubled homecoming, while Zeus and the other deities hobbled me with hardships far from my own country, though I longed to be back!
But now we've come at last to the marriage bed we yearned for,
you'll care for such possessions as I have here in the halls;
and as for the flocks that these haughty suitors have wasted, I'll get a good many by raiding, and others that the Achaians will give me, until we've replenished every last empty stall!
My first task now is to visit my wooded farmstead and see
my sturdy old father, who's so distressed on my account.
And on you, wife, I lay this charge, as a sensible woman: Beginning at sunrise the word will very soon get around concerning these men, the suitors, whom I slew in our halls; so both you and your women servants must go upstairs
to your chamber and sit there: no peeping, don't ask questions."
That said, he arranged his fine armor about his shoulders, woke up Telemachos and the cowherd and the swineherd, and ordered them all to lay hands on their war gear. They did not disregard him, but donned their bronze body armor,
and opened the doors and went out, with Odysseus leading.
Light already was over the earth, but Athene concealed them in darkness, and led them out quickly from the city.


BOOK 24

Hermes, god of Kyllene, now summoned forth the ghosts
of the men who'd been suitors: he held the staff in his hands- exquisite, golden-with which he bemuses the eyes
of those he wishes, while others he conjures out of their sleep.
This he used to herd and to lead them: they followed him, squeaking. As in the furthest recesses of some vast cave the bats
flit about squeaking when one of them falls down the rock face from the chain they form, clinging closely one to another,
so these went along with him, squeaking. Hermes the healer
conducted them down dank and moldering pathways:
by the streams of Ocean they went, and the White Rock, they went by the gates of the sun and the region of dreams, and quickly they now arrived at the meadow of asphodels, where ghosts dwell, the shades of those whose toils are over.
There they found the ghost of Peleus' son Achilles,
and those of Patroklos and of peerless Antilochos, and of Aias, unmatched for handsomeness and stature among all the Danaäns, save for Peleus' peerless son.
So these gathered round Achilles. Close to them now
there came the ghost of Atreus' son Agamemnon,
grieving; and round him clustered the ghosts of all those who'd died and met their fate with him in Aigisthos' house;
and the first ghost to address him was the son of Peleus, saying: "Son of Atreus, we had this belief that Zeus, the hurler of bolts,
loved you above other heroes, for all your days, because
you were lord over many brave men out there in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaians suffered much hardship.
Yet on you as well there was fated to come too early that deadly destiny which no mortal born can avoid-
Would that, while still enjoying your royal power,
you'd encountered your death and fate in Trojan country!
"Then all the Achaians would have made you a burial mound, and great glory would have been yours, and your son's, hereafter,
whereas now you've been doomed to suffer a most piteous death."
Then the ghost of the son of Atreus responded to him, saying:
"Ah, fortunate son of Peleus, godlike Achilles: you died
out at Troy, far from Argos, and around you others were slain, the finest sons of the Trojans and the Achaians,
fighting over your body; amid the swirling dust
great in your greatness you lay, your horsemanship forgotten.
That whole day we battled; we'd never have quit fighting had Zeus not unleashed a hurricane, and stopped us.
But when we'd carried you out of the battle to the ships, we laid you on a litter, and cleansed your splendid body
with warm water and unguents, and the Danaäns shed
many warm tears over you, cut off locks of their hair.
Your mother came up from the sea with her immortal sea nymphs when she heard the news: a cry echoed over the deep,
a strange cry, and panic now seized on all the Achaians:
they'd have taken off and run for it, back to the hollow ships,
had they not been checked by a man versed in ancient wisdom- Nestor: even before this his counsel had seemed the best.
He with friendly intent now addressed the assembly, saying: 'Stop this, you Argives! Don't flee, you Achaian youths!
It's his mother, come from the sea with her immortal sea nymphs
in her concern for the death of her own son.'
"So he spoke, and the great-hearted Achaians abandoned their panic flight. Round you gathered the daughters of the Old Man of the Sealamenting piteously, wrapped you in ambrosial clothing;
all the Nine Muses with their sweet antiphonal voices
now led the dirge-there wasn't a single tearless Argive
to be seen, so deeply did the clear-toned Muse affect them. So for seventeen days, by night as well as by day,
we mourned you, immortal gods and mortal men together;
then on the eighteenth we surrendered you to the fire,
and many fat sheep and crumple-horned oxen we slaughtered around you; you were burned in the gods' own clothing
with a wealth of sweet honey and unguents: many Achaian heroes
footed it round the pyre in their war gear while you burned,
foot soldiers and horsemen both: a great clamor arose.
But when Hephaistos' flames had finished their work, at dawn we collected your white bones, Achilles,
in unmixed wine and fine oil. Your mother had given us a golden two-handled jar: a present from Dionysos,
she said, and the work of renowned Hephaistos. In this
your white bones now lie, illustrious Achilles, mingled with those of dead Patroklos, Menoitios' son; separate are those of Antilochos, whom you honored
above all your comrades, save only dead Patroklos. Over them
we heaped up a huge and matchless burial mound-
we, the sacred army of Argive spearmen-on
a prominent headland by the broad Hellespont,to be visible far out at sea both to men now living and those yet unborn hereafter. And your mother
sought and obtained from the gods most exquisite prizes
and set them in mid-arena to be won by the best Achaians. Before now you've been present at the funeral games of many heroes, when on the occasion of a king's demise
young men gird themselves up and prepare to compete
for prizes; had you seen these ones you'd have been astounded
by the sheer beauty of the prizes the goddess, silver-footed
Thetis, set up in your honor: most dear to the gods you were! So not even in death did you lose your name, but forever your noble renown, Achilles, shall be known to all mankind.
But what pleasure had I from this-that I wound up the war?
For on my return Zeus contrived me a most miserable end,
at the hands of Aigisthos and my accursed wife."
Such was the conversation between them, one to the other. 
The Escort, the slayer of Argos, now approached them,
leading down the ghosts of those suitors whom Odysseus had killed;
The two, amazed by the sight, went straight to meet them. 
The ghost of Agamemnon, Atreus' son, recognized 
Melaneus' dear son, far-famed Amphimedon, who
had his home on Itháke, and whose guest-friend he'd once been.
Atreus' son was the first to speak, and addressed him, saying:
"Amphimedon, what befell you, all picked men of like age,
to bring you here, down below the dark earth? Not otherwise would one make one's list if selecting the best men in the city!
Was it Poseidon destroyed you aboard your vessels
by stirring up the dread blast of hard-blowing gales?
Or did hostile men work your destruction on dry land when you were lifting their cattle and fine fleecy sheep or fighting them for their city and for their women?
Answer my question! I declare that I'm your guest-friend-
Don't you recall the time I came there to your house
with godlike Menelaös, to persuade Odysseus
to accompany us to Ilion on the well-benched ships?
A whole month the journey took us, crossing the broad deep, for hard it was to persuade Odysseus the city-sacker."
Then the ghost of Amphimedon responded to him, saying:
"Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men,
I recall these events, Zeus' nursling, just as you recount them; and now I in turn shall tell you, truthfully and in full,
what led to our nasty death, how the whole thing happened.
We were courting the wife of the long-absent Odysseus:
she neither rejected nor made this marriage that she hated, but-while planning death and black fate for us- privately conceived this other trick in her mind.
In her halls she set up a great loom, and started weaving-
very broad was the web, fine of thread-and said to us then:
'You young men, my suitors now noble Odysseus is dead, be patient, though eager to wed me, until I finish
this web: I should not want my woven work to be wasted- a shroud for the hero Laërtes, against that day
when the grim fate of pitiless death shall overtake him:
then the local Achaian women won't be able to blame me
for a man who'd won so much being left with no winding-sheet.'
"So she spoke; our proud hearts assented to what she said. From then on, day after day, she'd be weaving at the great loom,
but at night she'd have torches set up, and undo her work.
Thus for three years she beguiled and persuaded the Achaians; but when the fourth year arrived, and the seasons came round, and the months wore away, and day after day passed by,
then one of her women, who knew the truth, informed us,
and we caught her undoing her work at that splendid loom.
So she finished it off perforce, though against her will, and showed it to us when she'd woven it on the great web
and washed it: it shone like the sun or the moon. It was then that some evil spirit brought Odysseus from who knows where
to the border of his estate, where the swineherd lived.
Thither too there came the dear son of godlike Odysseus, on his way back in his black ship from sandy Pylos;
and the two of them, after planning a nasty death for the suitors, returned to the famous town, Odysseus later,
but Telemachos going on ahead of him. Now the swineherd
brought in Odysseus, meanly garbed, and made to look like a miserable beggar, of a great age
and propped on a staff. The clothes he wore were ragged.
No man among us, not even the older ones, when he
appeared out of nowhere could tell who he really was:
we all assailed him with insults, threw things at him.
He for a while, set firm in his purpose, put up
with being pelted and taunted there his own domain; but when the intent of Zeus of the aegis stirred him,
with Telemachos' help he removed all the first-class war gear,
stowed it away in a storeroom and bolted the door.
Then, in his crafty planning, he instructed his wife to set before the suitors his bow and the grey iron, as a contest- and the beginning of death-for us ill-fated men.
Not one of us was able to draw and notch the string
of his powerful bow: we all fell far short of that.
But when the great bow was passed into Odysseus' hands, then we all of us made a great outcry, shouted aloud
not to give him the bow, whatever he might say.
Only Telemachos urged him on, and told him to try it.
So the noble much-enduring Odysseus grasped the bow, and easily strung it, and sent an arrow through the iron. Then he went and stood on the threshold, and emptied out his swift shafts, glancing round fiercely, and shot the prince
Antinoös, then let fly at the others his hurtful arrows,
taking sure aim. The men fell thick and fast, and now it became very clear that some god was his helper,
for suddenly sallying forth they raged from room to room killing men on all sides, and a ghastly clamor went up
as heads were stove in, and the whole floor ran with blood.
So we all died, Agamemnon; and even now our bodies are still lying there, uncared-for, in the halls of Odysseus,
since the dear ones in each man's home as yet know nothing of it- those who'd wash the black gore away from our wounds,
and lay us out, keening: the proper privilege of the dead."
Then the ghost of the son of Atreus responded to him, saying: "Ah, fortunate son of Laërtes, resourceful Odysseus!
Truly endowed with great virtue was the bedfellow you won! How excellent was the mind-set of Ikarios' daughter,
blameless Penelope, how well she remembered Odysseus, her wedded husband! And so the renown of her great virtue
shall never perish, because the immortals shall make a charming song for men here on earth, about constant Penelope!
Not such was Tyndareus' daughter, who did a wicked deed,
killing her wedded husband: loathsome the song about her
left to posterity, and vile the repute she bequeathed
to all womankind, even those who conduct was virtuous."
Such was the conversation they had with one another, standing in Hades' domain, deep down below the earth.
The others now, leaving the city, soon arrived at Laërtes'
farmstead, fine and well-cultivated, which he'd acquired long ago, and heavy the labor that he'd expended on it. This was his home. All round it ran the outhouses in which there ate, sat, and slept those who were his servants
out of necessity, working at whatever he wanted. Inside
the house lived an old Sikelwoman, who took good care of the old man himself, on his farmstead, far from the city.
Odysseus addressed his servants and son, saying: "You go now into his well-built house, and quickly choose and slaughter
for dinner the very best of the hogs; but as for me,
I mean to make trial of my father, find out whether he will recognize me, know who I am when he sees me, or fail to know me, since I've been away so long."
So saying, he handed over his war gear to his servants.
They then hastened into the house, but Odysseus
went off to the flourishing vineyard to carry out his test. As he entered the large orchard he did not find Dolios, or any of his slaves or his sons: they'd all gone off collecting stones to make a wall for the vineyard,
with the old man leading the way. Instead he found
his father alone in the well-constructed vineyard, digging around a plant, in a filthy tunic,
patched and shabby, and round his shins he'd fastened stitched leggings of oxhide, to stop him getting scratched,
with gloves on his hands against the thorns, and above them
on his head a goatskin cap-all fostering his sorrow. When much-enduring noble Odysseus saw him thus, worn out by old age, and with great grief in his heart, standing below a tall pear tree he shed tears, as he
debated in mind and heart what it was he should do next:
should he kiss and embrace his father, tell him all
about how he'd returned, come back to his own country; or should he first ask him questions, test him on details?
And as he reflected, it struck him that this was the better course:
to make trial of him to begin with, use bantering language.
With this in mind noble Odysseus went directly to him. Laërtes, head down, was still digging around the plant: his illustrious son came up and addressed him, saying:
"Old man, you've no lack of skill, the way you tend this orchard!
You take good care of it all, there isn't one thing here-
plant or fig tree, vine, pear tree, olive, or even
the vegetable plot-that lacks proper cultivation!
But I do have to tell you, and please don't take offense: your person is not well cared for: you endure a wretched
old age, you're unpleasantly filthy, you wear foul clothes.
Why doesn't your master look after you? Not, clearly, because you're idle! There's nothing slavish about your appearance,
in bearing or stature: you're like a man who's a king- the kind of person who, when he's bathed and eaten,
should sleep soft. And that's the proper way for the old!
Now come, tell me this, and answer me truthfully:
What man's servant are you? Whose orchard is this you tend? And tell me this truly also, so I may be certain:
Is this really Itháke I've come to, as a man informed me
whom I encountered just now as I made my way here?
He wasn't very clear-headed: he didn't manage to tell me any particulars, or listen to what I said when I asked him about a guest-friend of mine: does he still live, exist?
Or is he dead already, and in Hades' domain? I shall
speak plainly to you: pay attention and hear me out!
I once, in my own country, entertained a man who'd come to our house, and no other mortal yet
of all remote-dwelling strangers was more welcome there.
By descent he was, he said, from Itháke: he told me
his own father was Laërtes, the son of Arkeisios.
I escorted him to our house, and welcomed him properly with full entertainment from our rich household store;
and I offered him gifts of guest-friendship, such as are fitting- of fine-wrought gold I bestowed on him seven talents,
and a mixing-bowl all of silver, adorned with flowers,
a dozen plain cloaks, the same number of rugs and blankets, and as many beautiful mantles, with matching tunics; women I also gave him, skilled in fine handiwork,
four of them, very attractive, the ones he fancied himself."
Then his father responded to him, shedding tears:
"Stranger, indeed you've come to the land about which you ask; but outrageous and reckless men are now masters of it,
and these countless gifts you bestowed were given in vain, for if you'd found him alive in this land of Itháke
he'd have sent you on your way with ample gifts in exchange,
after generous entertainment, the due right of the one
who began it. Come, tell me this, and give me a truthful answer: How many years is it now since you entertained that guest,
your unfortunate guest-my son, if he ever existed,
my ill-fated son! Far from friends and homeland, either fish have doubtless devoured him out in the deep, or else
he's fallen prey on land to wild beasts and birds. Neither
his mother nor I, his parents, mourned and enshrouded him;
nor did prudent Penelope, his well-dowered wife,
keen over her own husband, as was fitting, on his bier after closing his eyes-the proper entitlement of the dead.
And tell me this truly also, so I may be certain:
Who are you? From where? What city? Who are your parents?
Where is the swift ship moored that brought you hither
with your godlike comrades? Or did you pay your passage
aboard another's vessel, so they put you off, and sailed on?"
Then resourceful Odysseus responded to him, saying:
"I will give you a full and truthful account of these things. I come from Alybas, where I live in a well-known house,
and I'm the son of Apheidas, Lord Polypemon's son:
my own name is Eperitos. Some god drove me off course from Sikaníe,landed me here against my will. My ship's out there, beached off farmland, far distant from the city.
But as for Odysseus, this is now the fifth year since
he departed from there and left my native country-
ill-fated man! Yet he had good omens on setting out-
birds on the right: I was glad of them as I sent him on his way, and he was glad at departure. We both had high hopes
of meeting again as guest-friends, and exchanging splendid gifts."
So he spoke. A black cloud of grief now covered Laërtes:
with both hands he gathered up the dark grimy dust, poured it over his grizzled head, ceaselessly groaning. Odysseus' heart was stirred, and up through his nostrils rose a strong sharp pang as he looked at his dear father.
He sprang forward, embraced and kissed him, exclaiming: "Father,
I myself, here, am the man about whom you ask, come back in the twentieth year to my own country! So stop your weeping and tearful lamentation,
for I'll explain everything. But we urgently need to hurry-
I've killed the suitors who were occupying our house,
in revenge for their outrageous conduct and wicked acts."
Then Laërtes responded to him, saying: "If it's true
that you who've come here are indeed my son, Odysseus, then give me some certain proof that will convince me."
To him resourceful Odysseus responded, saying: "Firstly,
take a close look at this scar, from a wound I was dealt by the white tusk of a boar out up on Parnassos, when
I went there because you sent me, you and my lady mother, to my mother's father Autolykos, to collect the gifts
he'd agreed and promised to give me when he came here.
Look, I'll also tell you the trees that you once gave me in our well-laid-out orchard: I asked for each one as I
accompanied you through the garden-I was still a child.
It was these very trees we passed by, and you named them for me,
and told me about each one. Thirteen pear trees you gave me,
ten apple trees, forty fig trees. Rows of vines too you named, and promised me fifty of these, to ripen at different times, with clusters of grapes upon them at every stage, depending on when Zeus' seasons brought them to their heaviest weight."
So he spoke, and his father's knees and heart gave way
as he recognized the sure signs that Odysseus had given him. He embraced his dear son; but then noble much-enduring Odysseus caught and held him close as he fainted. But when he came round again, and the spirit revived in his breast,
he responded once more, and spoke, saying: "Zeus, Father,
you gods indeed still exist on high Olympos, if it's true
that the suitors have paid the price for their wanton violence!
But now I'm terribly scared at heart that very soon all the men of Itháke will come here against us, and send
urgent messages out to the Kephallenian cities."
Resourceful Odysseus now responded to him, saying: "Never fear, don't let these matters disturb your mind! And now let's go to your house near the orchard, for I sent Telemachos on ahead, with the cowherd and swineherd, to quickly prepare a meal there."
So the two of them spoke,
and now made their way to Laërtes' fine house; and when they reached his pleasantly sited dwelling, there they found
Telemachos and the cowherd and the swineherd carving plentiful meat up and mixing the bright wine.
Now great-hearted Laërtes was bathed there in his house by the Sikel servant. She rubbed him down with oil,
and dressed him in a fine mantle; and Athene stood close, and filled out the limbs of the shepherd of the people
and made him of greater stature and sturdier to behold.
Out of the bath he came, and his dear son was astonished
to see him look so like the immortal gods; and he spoke, and addressed him with winged words, saying: "My father, it must be that one of the gods who are forever
has improved your looks, made you taller and more handsome!"
Then sagacious Laërtes responded to him, saying: "How I wish, by Zeus the Father, by Athene and Apollo,
that-as strong as I was when, as lord of the Kephallenians, I took Nerikos' well-built citadel, on the mainland cape- in our domain yesterday, my armor about my shoulders,
standing beside you I'd helped to beat back those men,
the suitors! Then indeed I'd have unstrung the knees of many there in your halls: the sight would have gladdened your heart."
Such was the conversation between them, When the others had finished their work, and the meal was made and ready, they sat down in order on the benches and chairs. As they
were reaching their hands to the food, there now came in the elderly Dolios, and with him the old man's sons,
all tired from their field work: their mother, old Sikel servant,
had gone out and called them in, she who'd brought them up, and took good care of Laërtes, now great age was on him.
They, when they saw Odysseus, and realized who he was, stood still, in dumbstruck amazement. But Odysseus
in conciliatory language now addressed them, saying: "Old man, sit you down to dinner, and you others, give over
your wonder-we wanted to start on the food, but we've
been waiting a while, expecting you any moment."
So he spoke; but Dolios made straight for him, with both
arms outstretched, caught and kissed Odysseus' hand at the wrist, then addressed him with winged words, saying: "Dear master,
you're back! We missed you so much, we never thought
we'd see you again! The gods themselves brought you here! Good health to you, a warm welcome, may the gods bless you! Oh, and tell me this truly, I want to be quite certain:
Does prudent Penelope already know for sure
that you're back home, or shall we send her a messenger?"
Resourceful Odysseus then responded to him, saying:
"She already knows, old man: what need for you to do this?"
So he spoke. Dolios sat down againon his polished chair.
In the same way, his sons now gathered round famous Odysseus
made him welcoming speeches and clasped his hands in theirs,
and then sat down in order beside their father, Dolios.
While they busied themselves with dinner, there in the hall, Rumor the messenger sped through the city's every quarter, reporting the hideous death and fate of the suitors. Those
who heard it now hurriedly gathered from all directions,
sobbing and wailing, there in front of Odysseus' domain. Out from it each of them fetched their own dead for burial, and all those from other cities they now sent homeward,
in the charge of seamen aboard swift ships; they themselves
went, grieving at heart, in a body to the place of assembly.
Then, when they were all assembled and met together, Eupeithes stood up and addressed them, incurable sorrow a great weight on his heart on account of his own son, Antinoös, the first man that noble Odysseus had slain.
Shedding tears for him, he now addressed the assembly, saying:
"A foul act it was, my friends, that this man committed against the Achaians! Many fine men he took in his ships, and the hollow ships he lost, and the men all perished; and others, the best of the Kephallenians, he slaughtered
on his return. So come, before he runs away to Pylos
or sacred Elis, where the Epeians hold sway,
let's get going, or hereafter we shall be disgraced forever: this matter will be a reproach for men yet unborn to hear of
unless we're revenged on the killers of our sons and brothers!
For me there would certainly be no pleasure in clinging
to life-I'd rather die now, join the departed shades!
So lets get going, before they cross the sea and escape us."
So he spoke, shedding tears. Pity seized on all the Achaians.
Then they were joined by Medon and the godlike minstrel
from Odysseus' domain, for sleep had now let them go.
They stood there among them: amazement gripped every man. Then Medon, thoughtful and sensible, addressed them, saying: "Hear me out now, men of Itháke! Odysseus did not
perform these deeds without the immortal gods' support!
I myself saw a deathless god, who stood beside him,
in all ways resembling Mentor, yet as an immortal god he appeared there, in front of Odysseus, now encouraging him; now again, alarming the suitors
he'd storm through the hall, and they fell thick and fast."
So he spoke, and pale fear now seized upon them all.
Then among them there spoke the aged hero Halitherses, son of Mastor: he alone saw both before and after.
He with friendly intent now addressed the assembly, saying: "Give a hearing, you men of Itháke, to what I shall tell you!
It's your own fault, my friends, that all these actions happened!
You wouldn't listen to me or to Mentor, the people's shepherd, and make your sons give over their mindless stupidity!
In their criminal folly they perpetrated a monstrous wrong, squandering the possessions and insulting the bedfellow
of a most noble man, saying he would never return.
Let it be this way, then, and do as I tell you: we should not strike back-he that does might bring trouble upon himself."
So he spoke. More than half of them now sprang to their feet in a great uproar-the rest stayed together where they were,-
for this speech aroused their displeasure, they were convinced
by Eupeithes, so that now they rushed off for their armor, and when they'd clothed their bodies in gleaming bronze, they assembled then in a body in front of the spacious town,
with Eupeithes in his folly leading them: he imagined
he was going to avenge his son's murder. He was not destined
to come back himself, but rather to meet his fate there.
Athene now spoke to Zeus, the son of Kronos, saying: "Son of Kronos, our Father, supreme above all rulers,
will you answer my questions? What's your mind now hiding?
Will you promote further warfare and the vile din of battle,
or rather make friendship between the opposing sides?"
Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer responded to her, saying: "My child, why ask me questions about these matters? Was it not you yourself who thought up this whole plan,
for Odysseus to come home and be revenged on these men?
So, do as you please-but I'll tell you what's fitting. Now
that noble Odysseus has worked his vengeance on the suitors, they must swear a solemn oath: let him be king for life,
while as to the killing of their sons and brothers, let us
enforce a forgetting of it. Let them, as previously,
be friends with each other; let wealth and peace abound."
So saying, he roused Athene, who was eager already, and she went on her way, darting down from Olympos' heights.
When his group had assuaged their desire for mind-honeying food,
much-enduring noble Odysseus quickly spoke to them, saying: "Someone has to go out and see how near they're getting."
So he spoke. One of Dolios' sons now went out, as he ordered, stood at the threshold and saw them, all close at hand,
and at once addressed Odysseus with winged words, saying:
"It's them, they're close! We need to arm ourselves at once!"
So he spoke; they stood up and donned their armor. Odysseus and his men were four, with the six sons of Dolios, while Laërtes, and Dolios too, both armed themselves as well,
grey-haired though they were, now forced to be warriors.
Then, when they'd clothed their bodies in gleaming bronze,
they opened the doors and went out. Odysseus led them.
Athene, daughter of Zeus, now joined their company, likening herself to Mentor in both voice and appearance.
Much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced at he sight of her,
and at once he addressed his dear son Telemachos, saying:
"Telemachos, you'll now learn for yourself-having come where battle picks out the truly best men fighting-
not in any way to disgrace your fathers' ancestors, who
long ago excelled the world over in manly strength and valor."
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:
"You'll see me, if you so wish, dear father-such is my spirit- in no way, as you say, disgracing your ancestry."
So he spoke. Laërtes was glad, and made this declaration: "What a great day for me, you kind gods! I've joy past measure!
Here are my son and my grandson contending over valor!"
Grey-eyed Athene now came up and addressed him, saying: "Ah, son of Arkeisios, of all my friends the dearest,
pray first to the grey-eyed maiden and to Zeus her father, then at once whirl up your far-shadowing spear and throw it!"
So spoke Pallas Athene, and breathed great strength into him.
He made his prayer to Pallas Athene, and at once
whirled up his far-shadowing spear, and threw it, and struck Eupeithes through the bronze cheek piece of his helmet, which did not hold up the spear: the bronze passed through,
and he fell with a thud, and his war gear clattered on him.
Then on their front rank fell Odysseus and his illustrious son, striking at them with swords and twin-edged spears.
And now they'd have killed them all, cut them off from home, had not Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
shouted aloud, and stopped dead all the combatants, saying:
"Cease this disastrous warfare, you men of Itháke,
so you may part the sooner, and without bloodshed."
So spoke Athene, and pale fear now seized upon them.
In their abject terror the arms now flew from their hands
and dropped to the ground as the goddess uttered these words,
and they turned toward the city, longing to save their lives. Much-enduring noble Odysseus now gave a fearsome shout, and gathered himself and swooped like some high-flying eagle;
but then Kronos' son flung down a smoldering bolt, which landed
right in front of the grey-eyed child of the mighty Father. At this
she, grey-eyed Athene, addressed Odysseus, saying:
"Scion of Zeus, Laërtes' son, resourceful Odysseus, hold back now, abandon the strife of leveling battle,
or Kronos' son, far-seeing Zeus, may get angry with you."
So spoke Athene: he obeyed, and was happy. A sworn
treaty for time to come was now made between both sides by Pallas Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
likening herself to Mentor, in both voice and appearance.