Homer

The Odyssey

Translated by Herbert Jordan


Book 1

Tell how he wandered, Muse, time and again
confounded, after he sacked Troy’s citadel,
how many towns he saw and learned their ways,
how many trials the man endured at sea
to save his comrades’ lives, return them home.
Hard though he tried, he failed to save those men
whose recklessness secured their own demise.
Like fools they ate the sun god Helios’ cows,
and he made certain they would not survive.
Choose where to start your story, Zeus’s daughter!
So many other men eluded ruin,
survived both war and sea to reach their lands,
but nymph Calypso—regal, divine—kept him,
longing for hearth and wife, in vaulted caves,
where she entreated him to marry her.
Season on season passed until the year
arrived that gods ordained for his return
to Ithaca, but he had trials to come—
even when home. The deathless gods took pity,
except Poseidon, who remained enraged
until Odysseus reached his fathers’ isle.
Poseidon went to visit Ethiopians,
the most remote of men. They live divided,
some where the sun comes up, some where it sinks.
They sacrificed a mass of lambs and bulls
to please the god, while fellow deities
assembled in Olympian Zeus’s halls,
where he, father of gods and men, spoke first,
his mind consumed with thoughts of bold Aegisthus,
whom Agamemnon’s son Orestes killed.
Zeus spoke of him when he addressed the gods:
“Curious it is how mortals blame immortals,
and say their troubles stem from us, when they
invite their own ordeals through foolish acts,
just as Aegisthus did when, after he
wooed Agamemnon’s wife, he killed the king,
aware that ruin would follow. We warned him—
sending our courier, Argus-slayer Hermes—
neither to kill the man nor court his wife,
because his son Orestes would take vengeance
when he became a man and journeyed home.
So Hermes warned. Aegisthus did not take
our sound advice and now has paid full measure.”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered Zeus:
“Our father, Cronus’ son, exalted lord,
it is entirely fit that he lies dead,
as any mortal should who acts like him.
But my heart opens wide for shrewd Odysseus,
away from home and suffering for years
on seagirt land at midpoint of the seas,
a wooded isle on which a goddess dwells.
She is a daughter to foul-tempered Atlas,
who knows the utmost depths and holds the posts
that separate the earth from skies above.
His daughter trapped the wretched sorrowing mortal.
She tells him stories, yarns that soothe, enchant,
and hold him in her spell, until the warrior—
pining to see the wisps of smoke that drift
above his land—now wants to die. Yet you,
Olympian, have no heart. Did not the man
delight you with the offerings he gave
at Ilium? Why do you detest him, Zeus?”
The cloud-amasser Zeus replied to her:
“My child, what sort of words escaped your mouth!
How could I possibly forget Odysseus—
the wiliest man—forget the hecatombs
he offered us who hold the boundless skies?
The earth-shaker, Poseidon, though, remains
enraged because the man struck blind a Cyclops,
the half-god Polyphemus, mightiest
of Cyclops’ kind. (The nymph Thoösa bore him—
daughter of Phorcys, lord of restless seas—
after Poseidon wooed her in a cave.)
Enraged by that, Poseidon keeps the man
away from home but spares his life—so far.
Now is the time for us to set the stage
for his return. Poseidon will suppress
his rage because he lacks ability
to fight alone against the will of heaven.”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered Zeus:
“Our father, Cronus’ son, exalted lord,
since all the gathered deathless gods desire
that shrewd Odysseus reach his home again,
Hermes, the Argus-slaying messenger,
should speed to isle Ogygia so that he
can tell the fair-haired nymph of our resolve
to see unshakable Odysseus leave.
I will approach his son on Ithaca,
ignite his spirit, plant in him the heart
to call together local long-haired Greeks,
and castigate the men among them who
slaughter Odysseus’ goats and swaying oxen.
The youth will go to Pylos, later Sparta,
to see what he can learn about his father,
and meantime build himself a good repute.”
That said, beneath her feet she tied her sandals,
immortal gold, which sped her over seas
and boundless lands, as swift as breaths of wind.
She chose a spear whose tip was sharpened bronze,
a sturdy spear with which she could down ranks
should they provoke her mighty father’s daughter.
Athena darted down Olympus’ peaks
and stood at Ithacan Odysseus’ halls,
his courtyard’s threshold, bronze-tipped spear in hand,
disguised to look like Taphian leader Mentes.
She saw the haughty suitors there, as they
amused themselves at draughts outside the gates,
seated on skins of oxen they had killed.
The suitors’ minion heralds—willing lackeys—
were either tempering wine in mixing bowls
or wiping down the tables, using sponges,
or portioning out the choicest cuts of meat.
Telemachus was first to see Athena.
Troubled at heart, he sat among the suitors,
imagining his father nearing home
to oust the men who occupied his house,
restore to halls and lands their rightful honor.
So dreamed the youth, until he saw Athena.
He rushed straight through the entranceway, ashamed
a guest should be ignored. He stood near her,
he took her hand, her heavy bronze-tipped spear,
and as he did, he cheerfully announced:
“Guest, greetings! You are welcome here! Now first
you will taste food, then tell why you have come!”
He led the way, Athena right behind.
After they came inside the vaulted halls,
he stood the spear beside a soaring column,
within a crowded rack of many spears—
weapons his bold, lost father once acquired.
He showed his guest a linen-covered chair,
embroidered, set a stool beneath her feet,
and sat himself. He chose a place far from
the suitors’ tables, lest they drive the guest
to leave her dinner rather than endure them.
He sought to ask about his absent father.
A maid poured hand-rinse water from a vase
of purest gold above a silver basin,
and when the two had washed, she brought a table.
The head housekeeper set before them bread,
then proudly served a rich array of foods.
A carver came with trays of sumptuous meats,
then stood a golden goblet near each diner.
A pourer kept both goblets filled with wine.
In time the brazen suitors strode inside
and lounged about on couches or soft chairs.
To wash their hands, their lackeys brought clear water,
while female servants loaded bread in baskets
and young men poured till wine bowls overflowed.
The suitors took the pleasures that were offered,
and soon dispatched desire for food or drink.
Their interest turned to different kinds of pleasure—
the song and dance that are a banquet’s glories.
A herald put a lyre into the hands of
Phemius, reluctant minstrel for the suitors.
He plucked the lyre and sang melodiously.
Telemachus addressed the bright-eyed goddess,
speaking head by head in confidence:
“Dear guest, bear with me as I speak my mind.
They care for nothing but the lyre and song.
At ease, they eat what is another man’s,
a man whose bones now likely rot in rain,
stretched out atop the earth or tossed in waves.
If they should see him back in Ithaca,
each one would pray to have fast-running feet
instead of riches, gold or fancy clothes.
But he has met a wretched fate, left us
forlorn. Though every now and then someone
predicts he will return, his time has passed.
Now speak to me and tell me only truth.
What are your origins, your kin, your city?
What sort of ship brought you? How did your crew
steer you to Ithaca, and who are they?
I do not think you could have come on foot.
Reply with honesty and tell me if
you have been here before, perhaps my sire’s
warm guest in days this house was host to men
that he encountered traveling near and far?”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered him:
“Yes, I will give your questions truthful answers.
Mentes, Anchialus’ son, is who I am.
I rule the Taphians, men who love to row.
My ship and trusty oarsmen rest at anchor
from sailing toward the men of foreign tongue
in Temese, to trade our iron for bronze.
My ship lies far from any town, near wilds,
in Rheithron bay by Neium’s hillside woods.
I was your father’s guest and he was mine
in bygone years. The old man would confirm it,
Laertes, never in town these days, I hear.
He pines away in rugged countryside,
with but one handmaid serving food and drink
when weariness has sapped his limbs, the toil
of clambering up and down his hilly vineyards.
I came because I heard your sire was home,
but now I see that gods still thwart his journey.
Odysseus has not likely perished yet.
Perhaps he lives detained across the seas
where wicked men confine him on an isle,
wild men who keep him there against his will.
I offer you a vision from my mind
where gods instilled it. I believe it true,
though I am not a prophet or bird-reader.
Your father will not stay away much longer,
not even if they shackle him in iron.
His cunning will contrive a means to come.
Now you in turn tell me the honest truth:
are you indeed a son sprung from Odysseus?
Your head and handsome face look very much
as his did when we met so many times
before he left for Troy, where he and all
the finest Argives sailed in hollow ships.
I have not seen Odysseus since, nor he me.”
Telemachus stood facing her and said:
“I shall give you a truthful answer, guest.
My mother says I am indeed his son,
but no one knows for sure who fathered him.
Would I were son of one more fortunate—
whose latter years would find him prosperous—
instead of that most star-crossed mortal man
they say to be my father. That I swear.”
The goddess, gleaming-eyed Athena, hushed him:
“The gods did not give you inferior lineage,
for as you know, Penelope bore you.
Now tell me more, and answer truthfully.
Why hold this feast? And who makes up this throng?
A wedding? No, the guests did not bring food.
To me they seem presumptuous, arrogant,
how they carouse. A man might take offense—
an upright man—on seeing this disgrace.”
Telemachus was stirred and answered her:
“Guest, since you undertake to question me,
this house was surely once a place of honor—
while it was home to him we spoke about—
but such no longer is the gods’ desire;
they caused the man to disappear from sight.
My sorrow would be less if he were dead,
fallen on Trojan soil among his comrades,
or perished in their arms when war was done.
The Argives would have built a monument,
ensuring long-lived fame for him—and me—
but as if fierce whirlwinds swept him away,
he dropped from view, unheard from, leaving tears
behind. But loss of him is less hardship
than is the vermin plague the gods have sent:
the highest lords of every neighboring isle,
Dulichion, Same, forest-cloaked Zacynthus,
and every chief in rocky Ithaca.
They court my mother, they consume our stores.
She does not rule out marriage, nor can she
cut short their courting. They are eating up
my home’s provisions and soon may kill me.”
Pallas Athena, now impatient, spoke:
“A shame! Odysseus, your departed sire,
is needed here to crush the shameless courters.
If only he would walk to those front gates,
holding his helmet, shield and pair of spears,
the way he was when I first saw him come
to our abode, where he relaxed and drank
after he met with Ilus at Ephyra.
(Odysseus traveled there aboard a ship
in quest of deadly poison he could use
to tip his arrows. Ilus gave him none
for fear that might provoke the deathless gods.
My father gave him venom, sealing friendship.)
So armed Odysseus could take on the suitors,
who soon would be bridegrooms of wretched death.
But such a happening rests in heaven’s lap—
whether or not he comes to take revenge
here in his halls—so I urge you to think
of how to drive the suitors out yourself,
and here is counsel you should take to heart:
call all nearby Achaean men to meet.
Stand up and speak. The gods will be your witness.
First bid the suitors go to their own homes,
and if your mother’s heart desires to wed,
let her return within her father’s halls,
where he will make a wedding feast with gifts
in numbers fit to laud a treasured daughter.
Next, here is what I think you ought to do:
choose twenty men and one of your best ships,
then sail to seek some word about your father.
A man you meet may know, or you may hear
a rumor sent from Zeus to transmit news.
Go first to Pylos, question godlike Nestor.
Then visit Sparta, ruddy Menelaus,
who was the last Achaean back from Troy.
If you should learn your father travels home,
bear up for one more year, though you are worn,
but if you learn that he no longer lives,
return here to the isle your father loved,
erect a monument, hold funeral rites,
and give your mother to another man.
When you have done the tasks that I propose,
next redirect your heart, your mind, devise
the means to kill these men who haunt your halls—
by stealth or openly. You have no need
to play the child, since you are past that age.
Did you not hear about Orestes’ fame,
won when he slew his father’s murderer,
crafty Aegisthus, who killed Agamemnon?
You, too, my friend—who look both tall and strong—
be brave so future men speak well of you.
I must return to my fast-traveling ship,
where restless sailors are awaiting me.
Remain on guard, and keep my words in mind!”
Telemachus absorbed her words and said:
“Guest, you have given kind advice to me,
as might a father; I will not forget.
But stay awhile before you journey on.
Enjoy a bath, which will refresh your spirits.
Accept a pleasing gift before you sail,
a handsome object for your treasure stores,
the sort that friendly guests and hosts exchange.”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered him:
“Do not detain me; I intend to sail.
Whatever gift you have in mind for me,
save it until the next time I arrive,
and I will match your gift with one as fine!”
With that, the bright-eyed goddess disappeared,
flew like a hawk, and left Telemachus
a bolder, stronger man, his father’s son
more than before. He recognized the change,
awestruck, and knew the guest to be a god.
Inspired, the young man headed toward the suitors.
The minstrel sang while captivated suitors
sat listening to his songs of voyages home
from Ilium, travels that Athena plagued.
His song reached upper rooms and touched a heart—
that of Penelope, Icarius’ daughter.
The lyrics moved her; she walked down the stairs,
but not alone, two handmaids close behind,
and when she—like a goddess—neared her wooers,
she stopped beside a roof-supporting pillar.
She drew a satin veil across her cheeks,
a trusty handmaid stationed at each side,
and, tearful, she addressed the godlike bard:
“Phemius, you know many pleasing lays
that minstrels sing about gods’ deeds and men’s.
By all means serenade those silent courters
while they carouse, but do not sing that song,
the sorrowful song that always leaves my heart
in tatters, stirring deep, unfading sadness.
Daily I long to see a certain face,
my husband’s, famed throughout Achaean realms.”
Telemachus addressed Penelope:
“My mother, why would you forbid the bard
to sing what song his heart desires? Not he,
but Zeus is guilty; Zeus is who doles out
whatever he may choose to hapless mortals.
The bard is not to blame for Argives’ fates,
and men more willingly applaud the song
that is the latest one to reach their ears.
So you should steel your heart and soul to listen.
Besides Odysseus, more have not returned
from Troy, where countless valiant warriors fell.
Go to your quarters now, address your tasks—
see to the loom and shuttle; bid your maids
perform their work. But leave discourse to men,
especially me, the master of this house.”
Senelope retraced her steps, agape,
and took to heart the words her son had spoken.
Her servant women followed her upstairs,
where she bemoaned Odysseus until sleep,
Athena’s gift, fell gently on her eyes.
The suitors howled throughout the shadowy hall—
each yearned to take Penelope to bed—
until Telemachus began to speak:
“My mother’s proud and overstaying suitors!
Let us enjoy the feast, but stop this yelling,
so we can hear the minstrel’s well-wrought song.
The singer’s voice is almost like a god’s.
Come morning, let us gather in assembly,
a public meeting where I will demand
that you depart my halls, hold future feasts
in your own homes and eat your own livestock.
If after that demand you still prefer
to steal and waste another’s livelihood,
I will beseech the everlasting gods
that Zeus ordain you get what you deserve
and perish to a man here in this hall.”
Shose stinging words took every wooer aback—
amazed Telemachus had spoken boldly—
till one, Eupeithes’ son Antinous, said:
“Telemachus, it seems the gods taught you
to give a rude, intemperate public speech.
May Cronus’ son choose not to make you king
in Ithaca, despite your right by birth.”
Telemachus confronted him and said:
“Whether it angers you or not, I say
that if Zeus grants the scepter, I will hold it.
Is reign the worst thing that befalls a man?
A king has little to regret. His home
acquires respect, and wealth accumulates.
Besides me, though, any Achaean lord
on island Ithaca, one young or old,
might someday take Odysseus’ place as king,
but I will always claim to rule this house
and servants that Odysseus took as plunder.”
Polybus’ son Eurymachus spoke next:
“Telemachus, immortals will decide
who shall be king of island Ithaca.
Meantime you rule this house and keep its chattels.
Let no man come against you forcefully
and take them, not while Ithacans live here.
Now I would like to ask about your guest:
Where did he come from? Where did he declare
his family and his family’s lands to be?
Did he say that your father will come home?
Or had he business matters to attend?
He left abruptly, did not stay for us
to meet what looked to be a high-born man.”
Telemachus responded to the queries:
“My father’s chance of reaching home is lost.
I would not trust a claim that he is coming,
nor do I trust the auguries my mother
draws from the prophets summoned to these halls.
The stranger was my father’s friend from Taphus,
named Mentes, masterful Anchialus’ son,
now lord of oar-devoted Taphian men.”
He said this knowing his guest to be a god.
The suitors now became immersed in revels.
They sang and danced until the eventide,
whose darkness fell while they indulged themselves.
Then each set out for home in need of sleep.
Telemachus’ bedroom was by the courtyard—
a room built high so he could view the grounds.
The youth prepared for bed with troubled mind.
Beside him, torch in hand, stood tried and true
old Eurycleia. She was Ops’s daughter.
Long years ago, Laertes purchased her—
a budding maid—and paid with twenty oxen.
He honored her as if she were his wife,
but never did he sleep with Eurycleia.
She held the glowing torch for one whom she
had loved and helped to rear when he was small.
Telemachus swung wide his chamber door,
sat on his bed, removed his supple tunic,
and laid it in the prudent woman’s hands.
Her willing, skillful fingers smoothed it out,
then hung it on a peg above the bed.
Outside, she pulled the door shut by its ring
of silver, yanked the thong to set the bolt.
All night Telemachus lay wrapped in fleece
and dreamed about the voyage Athena planned.


Book 2

When Dawn’s rose-tinted fingers first appeared,
Odysseus’ cherished son sprang from his bed.
He dressed and hung a sword belt on his shoulder.
Beneath anointed feet he tied fine sandals,
and left his chamber looking like a god.
He ordered clear-voiced heralds right away
to summon local long-haired Greeks to meet.
The heralds called, obedient men appeared,
and when they all were gathered in assembly,
Telemachus, a spear in hand, arrived,
but not alone—swift-footed dogs at heel.
Athena showered him with godly grace,
and every man admired him as he strode.
The elders moved to clear his father’s seat.
Aegyptius addressed the meeting first,
aged and stooped, but nonetheless insightful.
A son of his, among Odysseus’ soldiers,
had sailed aboard a graceful ship to Troy,
the spearman Antiphus. The Cyclops killed
and ate him, though his father did not know.
He had three brothers: one among the suitors,
Eurynomus, two working family fields.
Aegyptius grieved for Antiphus, long absent,
and let tears fall as he addressed the throng:
“Now, Ithacans! Hear what I wish to say!
We have had no assembly such as this,
not since Odysseus’ hollow ships set sail.
Who felt a need to call this meeting now?
One of the younger men, or else an elder,
who may have news of warriors coming home,
a story he has heard and will repeat.
Or has he something else of public moment?
I think that he will prove a worthy man.
May Zeus ensure his speech is to our good!”
The words inspirited Odysseus’ son.
He sat no longer; now he yearned to speak.
He stood amid the gathering, and Peisenor,
attentive herald, handed him the scepter.
He grasped the staff and told Aegyptius:
“Old sir, as you shall see, the man is near
who called this meeting: I, beleaguered I.
I have no news of warriors returning,
reports that I have heard and could explain,
nor have I something else of public moment.
It is my own privation, trials at home.
My noble sire is lost, who once to you
was monarch, kind as might a father be.
But matters grew worse still. My household soon
will be destroyed, my means of livelihood.
Unwanted suitors have beset my mother,
the kin of high-born men in Ithaca.
They have not visited her father’s halls,
where old Icarius might give her to one,
select the man he thought the most deserving.
Instead they loiter daily in our house;
they kill our cows, our sheep, our fattened goats;
they feast and swill away our sparkling wines.
They freely waste our goods. There is no man
to ward off ruin—not with Odysseus gone—
and we are not enough to guard against them.
We are oppressed and know not how to fight.
I would myself if only they were fewer.
No longer should I suffer their misdeeds
and see my household lost. You should object
and feel embarrassed, shamed among the folk
who live nearby. Beware the wrath of heaven,
before gods turn against you, shocked at crimes!
I urge—in Zeus’s name and that of Themis,
who forms and breaks assemblies such as this—
restrain them, friends; leave me alone to mourn.
Stop them unless Odysseus, you believe,
committed wrongs against strong-greaved Achaeans,
and for their sake you take revenge on me
by tolerating wooers. I would prefer
that you yourselves consume my wine and cattle.
In that event, there might be recompense,
for we could make appeals throughout the streets
to compensate for goods you commandeered.
But as it is, I have no remedy.”
Incensed he cast the scepter on the ground,
and tears welled up. Most listeners pitied him,
and almost all were silent, lacked the heart
to give Telemachus a harsh response,
except Antinous alone, who said:
“Telemachus, such fury marks your speech,
disparaging and fixing blame on us,
though fault lies not with us Achaean suitors,
but with your mother, sly beyond belief.
By now three years have passed, and soon a fourth,
while she has teased the heart in each man’s chest.
She holds out hope, assures each one of us
through messages she sends but knows are false.
She also used another means to trick us.
She weaved upon a loom placed in her chamber—
a tall, imposing loom—and she proclaimed:
‘Now that Odysseus surely died, young suitors,
impatient as you are, wait for the shroud,
which I must finish, lest my thread be wasted.
The shroud will wrap Laertes when, for him,
the doleful final fate of death arrives.
The women hereabouts would censure me
if he should lie unwrapped despite his wealth.’
“She told us that, and we men trusted her.
In fact, by day she plied the massive loom,
but after dark she took her work apart.
For three long years her trick deluded us,
but when the passing seasons brought a fourth,
a servant maid who knew the truth spoke up.
We caught her then unraveling the shroud,
and after that she finished it perforce.
That is what happened, though you may not know it,
and all Achaeans here should know as well.
Now let your mother go, and bid her wed
a man she likes who has her father’s blessing.
But if she still puts off Achaea’s sons—
still schemes with quick, Athena-given wits
that foster artful works, deceitful plans,
which even ancient women never matched,
the fair Achaean dames of long ago,
Alcmena, Tyro, beautiful Mycene,
whose wits could never match your mother’s mind,
a gift employed by her in shameful ways—
we suitors will consume your livelihood.
As long as she holds to the strategy
that gods put in her head, her own renown
may grow, but you will lack the means to live.
We will not leave—for our tilled fields or elsewhere—
before she chooses one of us to wed.”
Glaring at him, Telemachus replied:
“Antinous, no, I will not force her out.
She bore and raised me. With my father gone—
alive or dead—I must repay her dowry
were I to send my mother to Icarius,
else suffer his revenge, and pain the gods
would mete when she, cast from her home, called on
the dreadful Furies. Fellow men would scorn me.
Therefore I will not tell her what you ask.
If that leaves you dissatisfied, enraged,
why, quit my halls! Find somewhere else to feast!
Take turns at home, consume each other’s stock.
But nonetheless, if you should still prefer
to steal and eat the goods that I possess,
consume them all, I will implore the gods,
pray Zeus to author deeds of recompense
to make you lose your lives inside my house.”
So spoke Telemachus, and thunderous Zeus
dispatched two eagles down from mountain heights.
The eagles sailed at first on lofting breezes,
so calm, in tandem, mighty wings outstretched,
but when they reached the meeting’s quarrelsome center,
they turned on one another, beat their wings.
Foreboding death, they eyed the heads below,
and each bird clawed the other’s face and neck
until at length they flew away, due east.
The men were terrified at what they saw—
no doubt a sign—but how should it be read?
Among them spoke old warrior Halitherses,
the son of Mastor and the finest seer
to augur meaning from the flight of birds.
He gave the gathered men his best advice:
“Ithacans, hear how I interpret this!
The omen mostly speaks about the suitors,
toward whom disaster rolls. Odysseus, see,
will not be gone much longer. Even now
he could be stalking suitors, planning death—
for all. There will be pain for others, too,
who dwell in Ithaca. While time remains,
consider how to forestall grief: the wooers
ought to desist, or they will wish they had.
I am no novice seer, but one who knows.
What I foretold that day will yet prove true,
the day long since when ships embarked for Troy
with Argive men including shrewd Odysseus.
I said that he would suffer, lose his comrades,
but in the twentieth year, unrecognized,
would come back home. That part will happen soon.”
Polybus’ son Eurymachus spoke next:
“Old man, go be a prophet to your children,
at home, and spare them ills they might confront!
I read what we saw better than you do.
Beneath the glow of Helios, numberless birds
take wing, not always signs. Odysseus, now,
has died afar. You should have died with him.
Then you would not be telling prophecies,
fueling Telemachus’ increasing ire,
in hopes he might reward your house with gifts.
Now I shall tell you what will come to pass
if you should use your wiles upon the youth,
arouse his fury with misleading words.
For him, the situation will grow worse
since he will prove inept against these men.
On you, we will impose a penalty,
a penalty to cause you grief severe.
Again, let me advise Telemachus
to send his mother to her father’s house.
There he will give a wedding, bridal gifts
in numbers suited to a treasured daughter.
I say that we will not accept a halt
to zealous courting, since we fear no one,
certainly not verbose Telemachus,
nor do we think your augury, old man,
will prove correct. Then you will be despised.
So we will take their goods, uncompensated,
as long as she continues to refuse
a wedding. We have waited these long days,
contending for her charms. We want no other,
however worthy she might be for marriage.”
Telemachus, unruffled, answered him:
“Eurymachus and all you high-born suitors,
I shall not waste my time to argue more.
The gods and this assembly know our stands.
But let me have a ship and twenty sailors,
men who will voyage with me to foreign ports.
I plan to visit Sparta, sandy Pylos,
for word of my long-absent sire’s return.
Some man may tell, or I may hear a rumor—
the kind Zeus breeds to spread reports of men.
If I should learn he lives, is headed home,
I will put up with you for yet one year,
but if I learn he died, exists no more,
I will return here to my fathers’ country,
erect a marker, give him funeral rites,
and grant my mother to another man.”
Telemachus sat down, and next arose
Mentor, who was Odysseus’ noble comrade,
and whom Odysseus—when he sailed—had charged
to oversee and manage all his goods.
Mentor addressed the assembly, meaning well:
“Ithacans! Listen now to what I say!
Never again should our monarch be kind,
or gentle, never more be fair or just!
Let him be always harsh and do us wrong,
since none of you does justice to Odysseus,
whose reign was kind, as if he were our father.
I am not troubled by the strutting suitors,
the violent deeds they do, their wicked plans.
They put their heads at risk when they consume
Odysseus’ goods, deny he will return.
But I resent the way the rest of you
sit silently, do not speak out and urge
the far-outnumbered suitors to desist!”
Euenor’s son Leocritus replied:
“Your wits are gone, Mentor, to say such things,
to urge these men to stop us. Ruin would come
to even more should they contest our feasts.
Why, even if Odysseus should come home—
while we brave suitors feasted on his stock—
and seek to drive us out of his great hall,
his wife might not receive what she desires,
because the man would meet a dismal fate
for having fought our numbers. You misspoke.
Now let this host disperse, each to his fields.
Mentor and Halitherses will arrange
the young man’s voyage—they were his father’s comrades—
but I think he will stay, awaiting news
in Ithaca, and never make the voyage.”
Sith those brusque words the colloquy was ended.
The gathered men dispersed, most toward their homes,
but all the suitors toward Odysseus’ halls.
Telemachus walked alone beside the surf.
He rinsed his hands in brine and spoke a plea:
“Help me, immortal one who yesterday
said I should cross the misty seas by ship
to learn about my father’s journey home!
The assembled men refuted my demands,
persuaded by my mother’s swaggering suitors.”
That was his plea, and straightaway she came,
her looks again resembling those of Mentor.
She did not hesitate before she spoke:
“Telemachus, you are no dunce, no coward.
If you indeed possess your father’s spirit,
which brought about so much through word and deed,
your voyage will not turn out to be in vain.
If you are not your mother’s son by him,
you have no chance to get what you desire.
Not many sons turn out to match their fathers.
They fall far short, except a very few.
Since you will not be foolish, not be craven,
and since you have a mind in part Odysseus’,
the odds are good you will fulfill your mission.
Ignore the schemes and plans made by the suitors,
foolhardy braggarts neither wise nor just.
They do not recognize black fate and death,
approaching even now to slay each one.
The journey you desire will soon begin.
You see, I am your father’s old comrade.
I will procure a ship and board it with you.
Now you go home and mingle with the suitors.
Prepare provisions, pack them carefully.
Get wine in double-handled jars. Get grain
in sturdy skins. I will select our crew
from men who volunteer. Vessels there are
in Ithaca aplenty, new and old.
I will examine them and choose the best.
We soon will rig her out and take to sea.”
So Zeus’s daughter spoke, and not a whit
did he delay when he had heard the goddess.
He hurried home apace, his heart inspired.
He found the haughty suitors in his halls
and courtyard, butchering goat kids, roasting hogs.
Antinous laughed, approached Telemachus,
addressed the youth by name and clasped his hand:
“Outspoken lad, rest easy now! No more
concern yourself with angry words or deeds.
Come eat and drink with me as once you did.
The people will provide what you requested—
a ship and oarsmen—so that you may sail
to sacred Pylos, ask about your father.”
Astute Telemachus replied to him:
“I do not trust myself, among these strutters,
to hold my tongue and be content to feast.
I grew disgusted with you suitors, wasting
our stores while I remained a helpless child.
Now I am grown and have conceived a plan,
a course of action that fills me with nerve,
and I will strive to bring about your fall,
whether I go to Pylos or stay here.
But go I shall—and not without results.
I own no ship and sail a passenger,
which is as you considered best—for you.”
He drew his hand free, broke Antinous’ grip
with ease, while nearby suitors readied food.
They mocked Telemachus with biting words,
and one among the arrogant men might say:
“So, then, Telemachus concocts our deaths.
He plans to fetch support from sandy Pylos
or Sparta now that he is bent on murder,
or he may choose the fields of Ephyra
to visit, where he could acquire a poison
with which to lace our wine and take our lives.”
Another swaggering suitor could well say:
“Who knows? Aboard that ship the lad himself
may perish like Odysseus, far from home.
That would impose a welcome task on us:
divide what goods remain—except his house,
which goes to any man his mother weds.”
Telemachus walked down to his father’s vault,
a cavernous room, where gold and bronze lay heaped,
chests full of clothes, abundant olive oil,
tall casks of wine—mature and sweet to taste,
unmixed. These jars conserved the savory drink
behind a wall until the day Odysseus,
through toilsome trials, might reach his home again.
The room had heavy, tight-fit bolted doors,
beside which, day and night, a servant maid
kept watch—a woman wise in every way,
elderly Eurycleia, Ops’s daughter.
Inside the room Telemachus told her:
“Come, nurse, and fill two-handled jars with wine,
the choicest vintage here, second to what
you save for when the ill-starred man should come—
Zeus-sprung Odysseus, having bested death.
Fill up a dozen, fit a lid on each.
Fill well-sewn leather bags with meal for me—
let it be barley, twenty measures, ground.
Collect these things, but no one else must know.
This evening I will come for them, as soon
as Mother goes upstairs desiring sleep.
I go to Sparta, sandy Pylos first,
to seek some word of Father’s journey home.”
His one-time nursemaid Eurycleia wailed,
she moaned, lamenting while she answered him:
“Dear child, why do you have this plan in mind?
Why would you want to wander alien lands?
You are a cherished only son. Your sire
may have died far away on foreign ground.
If you leave, too, the suitors will contrive
a ruse to kill you. They will take these stores.
Stay here! Protect them well! You have no need
to wander restless seas and suffer trials.”
Telemachus, determined, said to her:
“Take heart, old nurse, my plan has heaven’s blessing!
But swear my mother will not know my plans
until eleven days have passed, or twelve,
or till she learns elsewhere of my departure.
I might return before she learns and weeps.”
The old nurse swore a solemn oath to heaven.
After she made her pledge, declared her oath,
she quickly filled two-handled jars with wine
and well-sewn leather bags with barley meal
while young Telemachus rejoined the suitors.
Athena, meantime, put their plan to work
by masquerading as Telemachus.
She paused by loyal men and spoke a word,
inviting them to board a ship at dusk.
She asked Noëman, Phronius’ glorious son,
to lend a ship, which he was pleased to do.
When Helios sank and shadows dimmed the streets,
she dragged the ship down to the sea, complete
with all the rigging seagoing vessels need.
She tied it at bay’s edge, and soon the men
appeared—the crew recruited by the goddess.
Bright-eyed Athena thought of her next step.
She found her way inside Odysseus’ halls,
where she shed balmy sleep on every suitor.
Groggy, they dropped their cups. Their revels done,
the suitors went to rest at home, and soon
lay down as sleep was weighing on their eyelids.
Athena then addressed Telemachus.
She called him from within the roomy halls,
her form and voice again like those of Mentor:
“Telemachus, your strong-greaved comrades now
are waiting by their oars, ready to sail,
so let us go and not delay our voyage.”
Having said that, Athena led the way,
a rapid pace, and he stepped in her prints
until they came upon the sea, the ship,
and long-haired oarsmen waiting by the strand.
Telemachus’ command rang out among them:
“Come on, my friends, let us go fetch our stores,
which wait at home. My mother does not know;
a trusted servant woman guards my plan.”
With that, he led, the sailors close behind.
The crewmen carried stores aboard the ship
and stowed them as Odysseus’ son directed.
Athena boarded, then Telemachus.
She took a sternward seat, and by her side
he sat while sailors loosed the sternmost hawsers,
then climbed aboard to take their seats at tholes.
Bright-eyed Athena brought a friendly wind,
brisk Zephyrus, across the wine-hued water.
Telemachus then gave his men commands
to rig the ship. They heard him, they obeyed.
They fit the mast’s butt to its hollow socket,
then raised the spar upright. They tied its forestays,
hoisted a white sail, stitched with oxhide thongs.
The fresh breeze blew against the sail till waves
were hissing on the vessel’s speeding stem
as she cut through the swells that crossed her course.
After the men secured their fast ship’s rigging,
they turned to mixing bowls brimful of wine,
and poured libations, one to every god,
but most of all to Zeus’s bright-eyed daughter.
The vessel plied her course through night till dawn.


Book 3

Helios left the bay below and rose
toward the heavens, bringing light to gods
and mortal men on grain-producing fields.
The ship reached Neleus’ Pylian citadel,
where those ashore were making sacrifice—
black bulls—to dark-haired earth-shaker, Poseidon.
Nine camps there were. In each five hundred men
were seated, each camp offering up nine bulls.
While they were burning thighs and tasting vitals,
the sailors neared, took down the vessel’s mast
and sail, then tied her up and disembarked.
Telemachus stepped off, after Athena,
the bright-eyed goddess, who declared to him:
“There is no need for you to hesitate.
You sailed across the sea so you could learn
whether your father died, lies under earth.
So come, go straight to stallion-master Nestor,
that we may learn what knowledge his breast holds.
Ask him yourself what insights he may have.
He knows of much, and will not answer falsely.”
Selemachus addressed her face to face:
“But Mentor, how shall I approach the man?
I am not skilled at using artful speech,
and as a youth am shy to question elders.”
The goddess, gleaming-eyed Athena, said:
“You will come up with words to say yourself.
The gods will surely help, for well I know
you were not born and reared against their will.”
Having said that, Athena led the way,
a rapid pace, and he stepped in her prints
until they reached a Pylian warriors’ council,
where Nestor’s sons were sitting with him. Aides
were turning spits of meat to make a banquet.
On seeing strangers, Pylian warriors raced
to greet them, clasp their hands and offer seats.
A son of Nestor, Pisistratus, reached
them first. He guided them and sat them down,
on shaggy fleeces spread on seaside sand
beside his sire, and brother Thrasymedes.
To each he gave entrails. He poured out wine—
one golden cup—which he raised high and hailed
Athena, aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter:
“Here, guest! Present a prayer to lord Poseidon,
whose feast you chanced upon by coming here!
After you pray and pour—as is the custom—
pass on the cup of wine to your comrade
so he may pour, since I expect that he
would wish to pray. We mortals all need gods.
He looks to be about my age, your junior,
so I will first give you the golden cup.”
He handed her the cup of mellow wine.
Athena liked the mortal’s prudent choice—
to offer her the golden tankard first—
and promptly she appealed to lord Poseidon:
“Hear, earth-grasping Poseidon! Do not be loath
to grant our prayers! Accomplish what we ask!
Let glory follow Nestor and his sons!
Grant happiness to every noble Pylian,
reward for lavish sacrifices here.
Grant that Telemachus and I may reach
the goal for which we came aboard our ship.”
She prayed for what she would effect herself.
She passed Telemachus the glittering cup,
and he made prayer just as Athena had.
Then, when the outer roasting meats were done
and portioned round, all dined on sumptuous fare.
After they quenched their taste for food and drink,
the old Gerenian horseman Nestor spoke:
“Now it is opportune for me to ask
our guests who they may be, since they have eaten.
Who are you, guests? From where did you embark?
Do you have business here, or do you rove
as do the pirates who infest the seas
and risk their lives to pillage foreign folk?”
The young man faced the old and answered him
with confidence Athena had instilled,
enabling him to ask about his father
and capture good repute among the men:
“Yes, Nestor, Neleus’ son, Achaea’s glory,
you ask from where we came, and I will tell.
We sailed from Nion’s foot in Ithaca
on private business I shall not conceal.
I seek to hear some word about my father,
steadfast Odysseus, he who once, they say,
fought next to you and sacked the heights of Ilium.
For every other man who fought and died
at Troy, we know where he encountered fate,
but did Odysseus die or does he live?
No one has named a place where he met death,
whether on land while fighting hostile men
or on high seas in Amphitrite’s waves.
I come to you in hopes you will see fit
to tell me of his death, if you observed
with your own eyes, or if you heard it told.
His mother bore him to a life of trials.
Give me no honey-coated answer, sir,
but tell me faithfully what you may know.
I beg of you, if ever my brave sire
fulfilled a vow to you by word or deed
in Trojan lands where you Achaeans bled,
recall it now, and tell the honest truth!”
Gerenia’s master horseman Nestor answered:
“My friend, your words have brought to mind ordeals
Achaea’s hardy sons confronted then.
Ofttimes aboard our ships on misty seas,
we roved behind Achilles seeking plunder.
Ofttimes around King Priam’s great citadel
we fought, and legions of our bravest died.
Warlike Ajax lies there, as does Achilles.
There lies Patroclus—godlike councilor—
and my beloved son: courageous, strong
Antilochus, who raced and fought so well.
We suffered loss on grievous loss, but who
could recollect the names of all the fallen?
Not even if you stayed five years, or six,
could you hear tell of every Greek ordeal
before returning to your fathers’ land.
Nine years we sieged, with Trojan ruin our aim,
but Zeus was slow to let us reach our goal.
No Greek would dare dispute Odysseus’ counsel,
not after time on time the man excelled
at stratagems—your father, if indeed
you are his son. I do admire your looks.
You talk like him, and who would ever think
a man so young could speak with words as apt.
Throughout that time, your noble sire and I
not once diverged in meetings or in council.
As if we shared one soul, we would propose
a plan designed to aid the Argive cause.
After we sacked King Priam’s steep citadel,
we sailed for home, but gods dispersed the Greeks,
and Zeus ordained a woeful voyage for some,
especially men who failed to be upright.
Such men encountered gruesome trials and fates
that Zeus’s angry bright-eyed daughter caused.
She sparked a clash between the sons of Atreus,
and they commanded all the Greeks to meet
at sundown, contravening custom, reckless
because Achaea’s sons were drunk with wine.
Each leader spoke, told why he sought the meeting.
First Menelaus urged that every Greek
should voyage home across the sea’s broad back,
but Agamemnon disagreed. He urged
the men to stay, make holy sacrifice
so as to quiet Athena’s dreadful wrath.
He should have known that she would not be swayed,
since deathless gods are loath to change their minds.
After those two exchanged contentious words,
they stood and heard the strong-greaved Greeks erupt
in raucous shouts, divided by the plans.
We passed the night distracted by harsh thoughts
about our fellows. Meanwhile Zeus brewed trials.
At dawn, my men dragged ships down to the sea
and stowed aboard our women, all our spoils.
But fully half the army stayed ashore
with lordly Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
while we embarked and rowed. We picked up pace
and sailed on seas a god had smoothed for us.
On Tenedos we sacrificed, so gods
might speed us home, but Zeus begrudged us that,
and stirred among us more internal strife.
Some vessels turned around, went back toward Troy—
those vessels that astute Odysseus led—
which pleased the son of Atreus, Agamemnon.
But I and those who chose to follow me
took flight. I saw a god was planning pitfalls.
Young Diomedes joined us with his men,
and ruddy Menelaus in due time
met us on Lesbos, where we mulled the voyage:
whether to pilot north of craggy Chios—
keeping it on our left—toward isle Psyria,
or sail by Mimas, passing south of Chios.
We asked a god to show a sign to guide us.
He pointed through high seas, straight toward Euboea—
the route to take so we could skirt disaster.
He stirred a whistling wind, and soon the ships
traversed the fish-filled sea and reached Geraestus
at night. For lord Poseidon there we burned
bulls’ thighs, in thanks that we had crossed the sea.
At Argos, four days thence, the crescent ships
of Diomedes, Tydeus’ horseman son,
lay moored, but I sailed on to here, the breeze
as fine as when the god first made it blow.
So I returned, dear boy, but I knew not
which Greeks had died and which were yet alive.
But since then, while I sat here in my halls,
I heard reports that you should know, and shall.
They say the Myrmidons came safely home—
Achilles’ manly son their leader now—
and home came Poeus’ son, Philoctetes.
Idomeneus led his cohort to Crete;
of those surviving war, the sea claimed none.
You must know Agamemnon reached his land,
and how Aegisthus brought about his death.
Aegisthus, though, has paid a price himself.
By chance, a son survived the murdered man
to take revenge against his father’s killer:
Aegisthus, who struck down Orestes’ father.
I see your comeliness, your size, my friend.
May future generations call you valiant!”
Telemachus regarded him and said:
“Ah Nestor, Neleus’ son, Achaea’s pride,
that youth took vengeance, yes indeed, and Greeks
will spread his fame to people not yet born.
If only gods would favor me with means
to take revenge against the strutting suitors,
the wanton, arrogant men arrayed against me,
but heaven has not bestowed that privilege
on me or Father, so I must endure.”
Serenian horseman Nestor said to him:
“Well, friend, what you just said has brought to mind
reports that crowds of suitors woo your mother
against her will, while planning ruin for you.
Are you content to bow, submit to them?
Have gods inspired the people there to hate you?
Odysseus may return and take revenge,
either alone or with a host. Who knows?
I wish Athena would take up your cause,
just as she shielded glorious Odysseus
at Ilium, where we Greeks sustained such ills.
I never saw a god show blatant love
the way Athena plainly backed Odysseus.
If she should take your side, as she took his,
the suitors soon would cease to think of marriage.”
Sautious Telemachus replied to Nestor:
“I doubt that what you say will come to pass.
You speak of wonders that to me exceed
the realm of hope, whatever gods might want.”
At that, the goddess spoke, bright-eyed Athena:
“Telemachus, what words flew past your teeth!
A god can guard a far-off man with ease!
And I would rather suffer countless trials
before I reached the day of my return
than sail straight home as Agamemnon did,
to death dealt by Aegisthus and his wife.
Still, when one’s death is sealed, not all the gods
can spare a favored mortal’s life beyond
the time when fate ordains that he shall die.”
Not yet convinced, Telemachus replied:
“No more such musing, Mentor, though we grieve.
Odysseus probably is lost. Perhaps
an everlasting god contrived his death.
But there is more that I would like to ask
of Nestor, him of peerless mind and judgment.
They say that he has ruled three generations,
and he appears as might a deathless god.
“O Nestor, Neleus’ son, tell me the truth.
How was it that the son of Atreus died?
Where was his brother Menelaus? How could
the rogue Aegisthus kill a better fighter?
Had Menelaus gone away from Argos,
traveling, when Aegisthus boldly struck?”
Gerenia’s master horseman answered him:
“All right, my boy, the truth I will tell you.
You rightly recognize what would have been
if Menelaus had come home from Troy
and found Aegisthus in his halls alive.
They would have heaped no mound for slain Aegisthus.
No, dogs and birds would have devoured his body,
dumped on the plain outside the city walls,
unmourned, given his deed’s enormity.
While Atreus’ sons and I faced trials at Ilium,
Aegisthus stayed in Argos, free of cares,
and used his charms on Agamemnon’s queen.
At first she spurned his impudent advance,
in part because she had an upright heart,
in part because a bard stayed at her side—
one Agamemnon charged to guard his wife
until the gods ordained she should submit.
Aegisthus took him to a desert isle
and left him there as prey for birds and dogs.
He then led her—grown willing—home with him.
Many a thigh he burned on holy altars,
and offered heaven gold and woven treasures—
thanks for the prize he never thought to win.
When war at Troy was done, we sailed together,
Menelaus and I, as friends would do,
but when we reached Athenians’ cape at Sunium,
Apollo pelted Menelaus’ helmsman
with gentle arrows till the man was dead,
his hand still round the speedy vessel’s tiller.
Phrontis he was, Onetor’s son, unmatched
at steering ships, even in furious storms.
So Menelaus stopped, reluctantly,
to give his comrade solemn burial rites.
Then he again embarked on wine-hued seas
and sailed his ships beneath Malea’s steeps,
and there far-thundering Zeus beset the voyage,
brought on a tempest, shrieking blasts of wind
and frightful waves that swelled to mountainous size.
Zeus split the fleet in two, drove some to Crete,
near where Cydonians dwell, Iardanus’ banks.
A tall, sheer rock demarks the water’s edge
where Gortyn’s outskirts reach the misty deep.
The South Wind there drives breakers near the crag,
toward Phaestus, where a low rock quiets waves.
The sailors blown there barely dodged black death.
Their ships, though, crashed on reefs and broke apart,
wholly destroyed. However, wind and waves
propelled the five remaining crafts to Egypt
with Menelaus. Gathering food and gold,
he roamed by ship among strange-speaking men.
Meantime, Aegisthus plotted crimes at home.
He ruled gold-rich Mycenae seven years,
subdued the people after regicide.
Before an eighth year passed, Orestes came
from Athens, killed his father’s murderer.
Thus sly Aegisthus paid for his misdeeds.
Orestes gave the Greeks a funeral feast
to laud Aegisthus’ death, and Clytemnestra’s.
Menelaus arrived the very same day,
with all the treasure his five ships could float.
So, friend, you should not stray from home too long,
leaving your wealth exposed to greedy curs,
unruly men who may devour your stock,
divide your goods and make your voyage for naught.
I urge you now to go to Menelaus,
who lately voyaged home from distant men,
lands so remote no man would even hope
to flee once violent storms propelled him there,
across a sea so vast that even birds
cannot fly back and forth within a year.
Go to him now. Your men will sail your ship,
or take my team and chariot overland!
My sons will go along and be your guides
to Lacedaemon, Menelaus’ realm.
Entreat the king, ask him to speak the truth.
He is an upright man who will not lie.”
With that, the sun went down and darkness fell.
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered Nestor:
“Old sir, what you have said is on the mark.
Now let the wine be mixed, ox tongues be cut,
to venerate Poseidon, all the gods!
When we have poured libations, let us sleep.
Daylight has turned to dark. It is not wise
to tarry after giving gods their due.”
The Pylians heard what Zeus’s daughter said,
and aides poured water over each man’s hands.
Young men prepared wine bowls, brimful of drink.
They passed out cups containing drops of wine,
and cast ox tongues in flames. They poured libation,
and afterward they drank until content.
Athena, then, and blest Telemachus,
arose and started toward their hollow ship,
but Nestor spoke up, urging them to stay:
“May Zeus and all immortal gods forbid
that you return now to your speedy craft,
as if I were a man in poverty,
whose home lacked bedclothes, too few sheets and covers
for guests or even him to sleep in comfort.
My rooms hold chests of fine-spun bedding linens.
There is no chance Odysseus’ only son
will make a vessel’s deck his bed, not while
I live or my offspring yet hold these halls
and host whatever guests may reach our door.”
With eyes agleam, the goddess answered him:
“You are well-spoken, sir, and it is right
that young Telemachus do as you say.
He should go with you now, that he may sleep
within your halls, but I to our darkened ship
must go to give our crew encouragement.
I claim to be the oldest man aboard.
The younger oarsmen followed out of friendship,
and few are older than Telemachus.
There I will sleep, beside the hollow vessel.
When dawn appears, I shall go to Cauconia,
whose people long have owed a debt to me.
Sir, after this young man has slept with you,
dispatch him with your son. Give them your team
that has the soundest legs and races fastest.”
That said, the bright-eyed goddess flew away
in osprey’s form. Amazement gripped the men,
and Nestor gaped at what his eyes had seen.
He grasped his young guest by the hand and said:
“Ah friend, you will not be without defense
if such a god as that will be your escort!
That was not merely an Olympus-dweller!
No, that was Zeus’s third-born child, his daughter,
who glorified your sire among the Greeks!
Be gracious, queen! Grant good repute to me,
the wife who shares my bed, and my dear children!
I vow to sacrifice a yearling cow,
a heifer, never yoked by any man,
and I will sheathe her horns in gold for you!”
So Nestor prayed; Pallas Athena heard.
The old Gerenian horseman led the way,
his sons and sons-in-law not far behind.
When they arrived within his dazzling halls,
each took his proper seat on couch or chair.
The old man mixed for them an ample bowl—
sweet-tasting wine, aged near eleven years,
which his housekeeper fetched and broke the seal.
After he mixed the wine, the old man prayed,
libating aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter.
When all had poured and drunk what they desired,
most sons set out for home, with sleep in mind.
Nestor assigned an honored resting place
to bold Odysseus’ son Telemachus,
a filigreed bed beneath the portico,
beside the warrior captain Pisistratus,
the only son of Nestor still unmarried.
Nestor himself retired to private quarters,
a bed that his respected wife prepared.
When Dawn displayed her earliest rosy light,
Nestor awoke and bounded off his bed.
He strode outside and sat atop a stone
that stood before his lofty palace gates,
a white stone, glistening, oiled, a stone where once
his father, brilliant counselor Neleus, sat
till fate subdued him, sent him down to Hades.
Achaea’s guardian Nestor now sat there
and held the scepter. Round him came his sons,
leaving their rooms: Stratius, Echephron,
Aretus, Perseus, godlike Thrasymedes.
The sixth to come was warrior Pisistratus,
who led Telemachus to sit beside him.
Gerenian Nestor was the first to speak:
“Straightway, dear sons, fulfill for me a wish,
so I may keep the vow I gave Athena
when she appeared to me last eventide.
Let one select a heifer on the plain
and have a herdsman drive the animal here.
Another find Telemachus’ dark ship
and fetch his oarsmen hither, all but two.
Another fetch the fine goldsmith Laerces,
that he may coat the heifer’s horns with gold.
The rest remain with me, but someone bid
the maids inside prepare a lavish feast,
arrange the chairs and firewood, fetch clear water.”
The sons did not delay. The cow arrived,
led from the plain; from round their crescent ship
Telemachus’ comrades marched; the smith appeared
and brought his craft’s essential tools of bronze:
his anvil, hammer, skillfully fashioned tongs,
tools made for metal work. Athena came
to take the sacrifice. Old horseman Nestor
presented gold; the smith veneered the horns
with utmost skill to please the goddess’ eyes.
Stratius and Echephron gripped the head.
From Nestor’s halls, Aretus brought a cruse
of hand-rinse water, also barley grains
in baskets. Thrasymedes held an axe,
sharp-edged, and stood prepared to strike the cow.
While Perseus held a bowl for blood, his sire
first rinsed his hands, then sprinkled barley kernels.
Praying, he clipped and burned the heifer’s forelock.
When every man had sprinkled grain and prayed,
the spirited son of Nestor, Thrasymedes,
struck hard. The axe’s blade sliced through the tendons
behind her neck. The cow collapsed, to cries
from Nestor’s daughters, daughters-in-law and wife:
Eurydice, Clymenus’ first-born daughter.
Men raised the victim’s head above the ground,
and warrior Pisistratus cut her throat.
Her dark blood flowed; the spirit fled her bones.
The men dismembered her, cut off her thighs
and, following custom, caked the thighs in fat,
two layers thick, and placed raw meat on top.
Old Nestor held the thighs in flames. He poured
on sparkling wine. The youths held five-pronged forks.
After the thighs were burned, the men ate entrails.
They carved, then skewered all the meat still left
and cooked the pieces, slowly turning spits.
Meanwhile Telemachus was nobly groomed
by Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter.
She bathed him, rubbed his skin with olive oil
and gave him clothes: a handsome cloak and tunic.
The youth’s appearance now was like a god’s,
and he sat by the people’s shepherd, Nestor.
When outer layers of meat were cooked till brown,
the men took seats and ate, while watchful aides
made certain that the golden cups stayed full.
After they quelled desire for food and drink,
Gerenian horseman Nestor told his sons:
“Now, children, yoke a team and hitch a chariot,
so that Telemachus can make his journey.”
His sons heard Nestor well, and they obeyed.
Straightway they yoked fast horses, hitched a chariot.
A servant loaded wine and bread aboard,
and meats, the kind Zeus-fostered monarchs eat.
Telemachus climbed on the chariot’s deck,
with Pisistratus, Nestor’s warrior son,
not far behind. He took the reins in hand
and flicked the lash. The horses gladly raced
out to the plain, left Pylos’ walls behind,
and pressed the yoke that joined them all day long.
But when the sun went down and ways grew dark,
they came to Phera, home of Diocles,
a son of Alpheus-sired Ortilochus.
They passed the night with him, a generous host.
As soon as Dawn displayed her rosy fingers,
the travelers yoked the horses, climbed aboard,
and drove across the courtyard, out the gates.
Then Pisistratus lashed the team, who flew
to wheat-sustaining plains, and on the flats
the horses bore ahead toward journey’s end
until sunset, when shadows veiled the ways.


Book 4

Next day, the travelers came to Lacedaemon.
They sped to glorious Menelaus’ halls,
where he and kin held double marriage feasts
for Menelaus’ handsome daughter and son.
Achilles’ son would soon receive his daughter,
as her sire vowed at Troy, and gave his nod.
Today the gods would see that pledge fulfilled.
The girl would go with teams and chariots
to Myrmidon domains of her betrothed.
The son of Menelaus, Megapenthes,
would wed Alector’s daughter. He was born
outside of wedlock. Gods left Helen childless
after she bore but one, her lovely girl,
Hermione, like golden Aphrodite.
Throughout the great high-ceilinged halls they feasted,
the kin and friends of peerless Menelaus,
rejoicing while a spirited minstrel sang
and plucked his lyre. A pair of acrobats
cavorted round the guests, to lead the dance.
Telemachus and Nestor’s splendid son
reined in the team before the vestibule,
where mighty Eteoneus noticed them.
Eminent Menelaus’ eager aide
raced through the halls to bring his lord the news.
He stood beside the Spartan king and said:
“There are two strangers, Zeus-sprung Menelaus,
two men who also look like Zeus’s stock!
Say whether we will tend their horses here
or send them on for someone else to host.”
Sxasperated, Menelaus snapped:
“You have not seemed so foolish, Eteoneus,
till now, when you spoke like a silly child.
How often did the two of us take cheer
from strangers on the road, in hopes that Zeus
would someday end our trials? Unyoke their team,
and bring the men for me to entertain.”
So Eteoneus raced away and called
more aides, who quickly followed him to help.
They loosed the yoke to let the horses cool,
tethered them fast beside the stable’s mangers,
and fed a mix of grains—barley and spelt.
They leaned the chariot on a whitewashed wall,
and led the guests inside. The two observed,
amazed, the Zeus-descended monarch’s palace:
there was a glow like that of sun or moon
throughout the high-roofed halls of Menelaus.
After their eyes had seen enough delights,
the youths stepped into burnished tubs and bathed.
Maids washed their skin, rubbed it with olive oil,
and gave them clothing: tunics, woolly cloaks.
The two took chairs by Menelaus’ side.
A handmaid poured clear water—from a jar
of finest gold—above a silver basin
to cleanse their hands. She set a polished table.
The chief housekeeper put before them bread
and sundry foods that she was pleased to offer.
A carver filled and brought a board with meat
of every sort, and placed two golden cups.
Host Menelaus spoke a friendly welcome:
“Do take some food, enjoy it! Afterward,
when you have eaten, tell us who you are,
what race? Your parents’ stock is not obscure,
but must be that of Zeus-descended kings
who held the scepter! You were not lowborn.”
Shat said, he passed the youths his fat chine piece,
the choice cut that was served to honor him.
They reached and took the ready treats laid out,
and once desire for food or drink was gone,
Telemachus addressed the son of Nestor
while leaning close so others could not hear:
“My friend, great Nestor’s son, did you behold
throughout these echoing halls the gleam of bronze,
of gold, of amber, silver, ivory?
The inner court of Zeus must be like this,
so much is here! The sight fills me with awe.”
Sut Menelaus overheard his speech
and right away addressed the youth’s remark:
“No mortal man can rival Zeus, dear boys!
His palace and its contents are immortal.
I may or may not have a mortal peer.
I suffered many trials and wandered far
for eight long years before my ships came home.
I roamed to Egypt, Cyprus, far Phoenicia,
to Sidon, Ethiopia, Erembi,
to Libya, where the lambs have horns at birth.
The cattle there bear young three times a year,
and neither lord nor shepherd ever lacks
for cheese, a cut of meat, or sweet white milk,
which flocks give on demand throughout the year.
While I was massing up my stores of treasure,
roaming afar, a villain killed my brother,
by stealth, complicit with his faithless wife,
so I take no delight in all my wealth.
Your fathers must have told—whoever they
turn out to be—of how I lost a household,
with many comforts, countless lavish riches.
I would accept a third of what I massed
if only I had spared the men who died
on Troy’s wide plain, so far from Argos’ pastures.
But as it is, I mourn, lament them all.
Ofttimes as I sit in my halls these days,
the grieving gives me solace. Other times
I pause when I have had my fill of tears.
I grieve for all those men, but none as much
as one who costs me sleep and appetite
each time he comes to mind, for no Greek toiled
or won as much: Odysseus. His reward
was tribulation, mine unending grief
for him, away so long, nor do we know
if he yet lives, or died. His mourners now
are three: Laertes, shrewd Penelope,
the son he left at birth—Telemachus.”
The words impelled the youth to miss his sire,
and hot tears welled at mention of the name.
To hide his eyes he raised his purple cloak,
but Menelaus saw and understood.
The monarch pondered in his heart and soul
whether to let the young man name his father,
or whether he should first make inquiries.
While Menelaus contemplated that,
Helen appeared. She left her fragrant rooms
resembling golden-arrowed Artemis.
Adreste placed a well-wrought chair for her.
Alcippe brought a soft wool coverlet,
Phylo a silver basket given Helen—
Alcandre’s gift, Polybus’ wife from Thebes,
in Egypt, where the homes hold treasure vast.
To Menelaus Polybus gave two tubs
of silver, two tripods and gold—ten talents.
His wife gave Helen separate lovely gifts:
a golden spindle and a rolling basket,
silver except the rim of purest gold.
Maid Phylo rolled that basket now to Helen,
laden with fine-spun yarn. Atop the yarn
the spindle lay, pre-wound with purple wool.
When Helen sat, a stool beneath her feet,
she straightway asked her lord about the guests:
“Zeus-fostered Menelaus, who are they,
whence did they come, these men who reached our halls?
Am I deceived, or do I speak the truth?
I say that I have never seen such likeness—
astonishing to me—between two men
as this youth bears to great Odysseus’ son,
Telemachus, the boy he left at birth
when, on account of my rash acts, the Greeks
sailed off to Troy and launched the bloody war.”
The Spartan monarch Menelaus said:
“Wife, I too saw the likeness you perceived.
He has Odysseus’ feet, he has his hands,
the piercing gaze, the head, the ample hair.
Just now when I recalled and named Odysseus,
and mentioned how he labored, suffered pain
on my behalf, the youth let fall a tear.
He raised his purple cloak to hide his eyes.”
Young Pisistratus, Nestor’s son, spoke up:
“Zeus-fostered Menelaus, Atreus’ scion,
he is Odysseus’ son as you suspect,
but he is shy, his heart is hesitant,
lest he speak out of turn or seem too bold
to you whose speech is like a god’s to us.
Gerenian horseman Nestor trusted me
to come as his escort. He longed to see you,
in hopes you might advise what he should do.
A thousand woes confront a son when left
at home with no supporters on his side.
Odysseus left Telemachus with none,
no man among the people to protect him.”
When he heard that, the monarch flushed and cried:
“My house contains the son of one I love:
a man who braved unnumbered trials for me!
I always said how I would welcome him
if ever thunder-making Zeus should grant
that both of us return across the waves.
I would have given him a town in Argos,
brought here from Ithaca his son, his wealth,
his loyal subjects, once the town was rid
of those now living there and ruled by me.
We would have met together often, never
again apart—without the joys of friendship—
until dark clouds of death enveloped both.
A god must have begrudged him such a future,
the god who barred return—for only him.”
Among the listeners rose desire to weep,
so Zeus’s daughter, Argive Helen, wept,
as did Telemachus and Menelaus.
Nor did the eyes of Nestor’s son lack tears
as he remembered brave Antilochus,
who fell to radiant Dawn’s illustrious son.
With him in mind, sad Pisistratus said:
“Atrides, Nestor always said you were
perceptive, every time we spoke of you
while we were sitting in our halls and talking.
Let me persuade you now. I am not one
to mourn at dinnertime. Besides, soon dawn
will come again, when I will have no qualms
if we should weep for men who met their fates.
The only ways to laud the wretched dead
are shedding tears and clipping locks of hair.
My brother died. He was by no means least
of Greeks, and was a man you might have known,
although I never did: Antilochus—
renowned for spearmanship and speedy feet.”
In answer, ruddy Menelaus said:
“Ah friend, you speak the way a prudent man
might speak, and act as if you had more years.
You talk as wisely as your father might.
Easy it is to know a lineage Zeus
has blessed through both his marriage and his sons.
Zeus granted Nestor blessings all his days,
so he could reach a ripe old age at home
and watch his sons becoming wise and brave.
We will suspend our sorrows for a time,
and think anew of food, first washing hands
again. With morning will come more discourse,
a talk between Telemachus and me.”
Ssphalion poured clear water for the wash—
Asphalion, Menelaus’ trusty aide.
Clean hands reached out and took the waiting morsels.
An idea came to Zeus-begotten Helen.
She cast into the wine they drank an herb
that banished sorrow, anger, every woe.
When mixed in wine, whoever drank it down
would not feel tears upon his cheek that day,
not even if his parents both met death,
not even if a cherished son or brother
were slain with bronze before his watching eyes.
Helen possessed a store of potent leaves
that she received from Thon’s wife, Polydamna
of Egypt, where the gardens are profuse
with herbs occult—some pleasing, some malign.
Egyptians know uncommon healing arts,
because that people stems from Paean’s race.
She cast the herb, bade servants fill the cups,
and spoke at length, resumed the conversation:
“Zeus-fostered Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
and all you sons of noble men! Some days
Zeus grants us favor, some days only ills.
Sit at the banquet tables in our hall!
Enjoy a story few but me could tell.
The tale is not about—nor could I name—
the countless trials of resolute Odysseus.
But here is one exploit he dared perform
inside the walls of Troy while Greeks fought there.
He bruised himself with fists, disgracing blows,
and draped his back in rags as might a slave.
He entered spacious Troy, his foe’s redoubt,
disguised so as to seem a different man,
a beggar, unlike Greeks the ships had brought.
He walked the Trojans’ streets and they were fooled,
the folk of Troy, but I knew who he was
and questioned him. He would not answer me
until I bathed him, rubbed on olive oil,
provided clothes and swore a solemn oath
not to identify him to the Trojans
before his safe return to camps and ships.
I swore, and he revealed Achaean plans.
His sharp bronze slaughtered many a Trojan rank
before he took what he learned to the Greeks.
The Trojan women mourned, but in my heart
was joy because by then I only longed
for home. I rued the folly Aphrodite
fixed in my heart to lure me from my land,
to let me leave my daughter, house and mate,
a man of handsome mien and ample wisdom.”
In answer, Menelaus told his wife:
“Wife, everything you said I know is true.
By now I have unraveled countless schemes
that men devised while I crisscrossed the earth,
but I have never seen a man such as
Odysseus was—both bold and level-headed.
Why, such a thing it was that he contrived!
We built a horse and sat inside, we best
of Argives, bringing fate and death to Trojans.
But you appeared below, perhaps impelled
by some immortal wishing Troy to win.
Godlike Deïphobus accompanied you.
Three times you circled, stroked our hollow trap.
You called the names of prominent Achaeans;
each time your voice was like the warrior’s wife’s.
Divine Odysseus, Tydeus’ son, and I,
sitting among the men, could hear you calling,
and Tydeus’ son and I were moved to rise
and show ourselves, or else at least to answer.
Odysseus stopped us, though, despite our urge,
and every Argive son held still, stayed silent,
except that Anticlus resolved to speak.
Over his mouth Odysseus pressed a hand,
secure, thus saving all the hidden men.
He held him till Athena led you off.”
Telemachus addressed the king and said:
“Zeus-fostered son of Atreus, chief of armies,
my father nonetheless did not dodge death,
despite the fact his heart was resolute.
Let us now go to bed while there is time
to take delight in rest and soothing sleep.”
Helen of Argos heard and bade her maids
prepare two beds beneath the portico,
spread counterpanes on top of purple sheets
and woolen cloaks to cover up the bedclothes.
The maids held torches high as they withdrew
to make the beds. A herald led the guests
outside the hall to where the two men slept,
Telemachus and Nestor’s manly son.
In private quarters Menelaus lay,
and by his side lay Helen, like a goddess.
When Dawn again displayed her coral fingers,
up from his bed rose warlike Menelaus,
put on his clothes, shouldered a whetted sword,
tied sandals underneath anointed feet
and stepped outside his hall, his look a god’s.
He sat beside Telemachus and spoke:
“Telemachus, what business brought you here,
across the sea’s broad back to Lacedaemon?
Public or private matters? Speak the truth!”
Astute Telemachus replied to him:
“Zeus-fostered Menelaus, chief of armies,
I came so you could tell about my father.
Looters, who fill my halls day after day,
devour my livelihood, destroy my flocks—
killing my sheep, my goats, my lumbering cows—
while they pursue my mother. Arrogant men.
So I came here in hopes you would see fit
to tell me if you saw my father die,
or heard about it from another man
who wandered here. To misery was he born.
Do not go easy on me out of pity.
Relate the truth of what you have encountered.
I beg of you, if ever my brave sire
fulfilled a vow to you by word or deed
in Trojan lands where you Achaeans toiled,
recall it now. I need the honest truth.”
A furious Menelaus said to him:
“I am outraged! That valorous warrior’s bed
is sought by interlopers who are cowards!
As when a doe has laid her suckling twins
near brush that hides a mighty lion’s lair
while she goes searching hills and grassy vales
for food, but in the meantime he returns
and deals a wretched fate to both the fawns,
so will Odysseus levy fate on them.
Athena, father Zeus, Apollo! Would that
things were as once they were on Lesbos’ isle:
Odysseus wrestled strong Philomelides
and threw him forcefully, delighting Greeks.
Just so if he should come among the suitors,
a bitter marriage they would have—to death!
As for the things you asked about, fear not
that I might be deceitful or evasive.
The truthful old sea god revealed to me
events that I will not conceal from you.
“Though I was set to sail from Egypt, gods
detained me since my offerings fell short,
and gods insist that we should heed their wishes.
An island stands amid the surging surf
off Egypt’s coast—they call the island Pharos—
as far offshore as one day’s favored voyage
by ships that sail before a whistling wind.
The island has a sheltered bay where vessels,
before long voyages, take on drinking water.
Gods kept me there for twenty days. No winds
arose to blow our ships across the sea,
to be our escorts on the sea’s broad back.
Our food, our pluck, would soon have been exhausted
had not a goddess come to rescue me.
She was the ancient sea god Proteus’ daughter,
Eidothea, whose heart I haply stirred
when she met me, alone without my men,
who daily roamed about the isle and fished
with curved bronze hooks to quiet their bellies’ hunger.
She stood by me, then raised her voice and said:
‘Are you a moron, stranger, dim of wit?
Or is misfortune something you enjoy?
While you have tarried on this isle, no end
in sight, your comrades’ spirits fade and die!’
“The lady spoke, and I replied to her:
‘Whichever goddess you may be, be sure
I do not stay because I choose. Perhaps
I wronged the deathless gods who hold the heavens.
Divine yourself, you ought to know, so name
the deity who keeps me from my voyage.
What must I do to cross the fish-filled brine?’
“The lovely goddess answered right away:
‘Yes, stranger, I will tell the candid truth.
Each day the sea’s forthright old man comes here,
deathless Egyptian Proteus, who knows the sea
in all its depths as lord Poseidon’s aide.
They say he is the father who begot me.
If you could somehow lay a trap for him,
he might reveal your journey’s course and length,
and means to get your vessels under sail.
If you should want to know, he might recount
what good, what evil, happened in your halls
while you have made your taxing homeward voyage.’
“The goddess paused, and I replied to her:
‘Perhaps you should devise the trap yourself,
lest Proteus sense my ruse and slip away.
A god is hard for mortal man to fool.’
“Straightway the godly creature answered me:
‘I will explain exactly what to do.
As soon as Helios reaches heaven’s center,
each day the sea’s forthright old man appears,
but Zephyrus’ breath makes ripples that conceal him.
There is a hollow cave in which he sleeps
with web-foot seals, the brood of Amphitrite.
They rise from hoary swells and huddle, sleeping.
They bring a horrid stench up from the depths.
At dawn’s first glimmer I will lead you there
to lie in wait with comrades you must choose—
the three best men aboard your stranded ships.
Now I will tell about the old man’s tricks.
He first will go among the seals and count them.
When he has seen and tallied them in full,
he will lie down with them as might a shepherd.
As soon as you have seen him lying prone,
you men must summon up your strength, your courage,
and hold him fast despite his powerful struggles.
He will assume the form of every beast
that crawls the earth, the form of fire, of water,
but you should only grasp him tighter still
until he starts to speak, to question you,
and looks the same as when he first lay down.
You may relax then, turn the old man loose,
and ask him which god seeks to punish you,
ask how you may get home across the deep.’
“That said, she dove beneath the heaving waves,
and I returned to where my vessels lay,
my heart profoundly restless as I walked.
In time I reached the hollow seaside ships,
where we enjoyed our evening meal till night,
and fell asleep along the water’s edge.
When early Dawn extended crimson greeting,
I set out walking by the foaming sea
and prayed to every god. With me walked comrades,
the trusted three on whom I could rely.
“Eidothea had plumbed the sea’s broad swells
and brought from deepest reaches four sealskins,
just flayed, which she would use to trick her father.
She hollowed out four beds in seaside sand
and waited till my men and I approached.
She hid us every one beneath a hide.
It was the worst of ambushes, exhausting,
covered beneath the sealskins’ briny reek.
What man would lie among such sea-bred monsters?
But she devised a pleasing remedy:
she placed ambrosia under each man’s nostrils;
its fragrance overwhelmed the monsters’ stench.
We waited through the morning, resolute,
till from the surf a host of seals emerged
and one by one lay down at water’s edge.
At noon the old man came to count his herd.
He neared and numbered every glistening beast,
us first of all, but never did his mind
suspect a trick. In time he too lay down.
Then we attacked and grabbed him in our arms,
but he did not neglect his wily skills.
He turned himself into a thick-maned lion,
a serpent next, a leopard, then a boar.
He changed to water, then a high-crowned tree,
but we held tight with steadfast hearts, unyielding.
At last the crafty ancient god grew tired
and deigned to query me. He posed the question:
‘Which god have you conspired with, Atreus’ son,
to lie in wait for me? What do you want?’
“He asked me that, and I replied to him:
‘You know, old sir, so why do you inquire?
I have been stuck here, island-bound, no end
in sight, and now my spirit fades, grows weak.
You gods know everything, so will you say
which deathless one has kept me from my journey,
the voyage home across the fish-filled seas?’
“At once the old man spoke and answered me:
‘You owed to Zeus—you owed to all the gods—
fine sacrifice before you sailed, if soon
you wished to span the seas and reach your land.
Your fate henceforth is that you will not reach
your fathers’ land, the safety of your walls,
till you have sailed to Egypt’s Zeus-poured river
and sacrificed a sacred hecatomb
to all immortal gods who hold the skies.
The gods will then vouchsafe the voyage you crave.’
“My heart beat fast to hear the old man’s words,
ordaining yet more trials on misty waters—
a long and arduous voyage to Egypt’s shore.
But even so, I spoke to him again:
‘I will perform the task you urge, old sir,
but now tell truthfully of something else:
did all Achaeans make it home unharmed—
those I and Nestor left, departing Troy—
or did some die a wretched death at sea,
or by the hand of loved ones at war’s end?’
“I so inquired, and he replied forthwith:
‘Why do you question me? You have no need
to know, to plumb my mind. Regret be yours,
and tearful will you be to hear my answer.
Untold men fell, but many sailed for home.
You saw the battle deaths yourself. Of those
who sailed, there were but two who met with death.
On trackless seas one man may yet survive.
“‘The lesser Ajax died among his ships.
Poseidon drove his vessel onto Gyrae,
the giant rock, but spared him from the deep.
Ajax might well have outmaneuvered fate,
but for a foolish, arrogant boast he made:
he claimed that he survived against gods’ will.
Poseidon overheard Ajax’s boast.
His mighty hands were quick to grab his trident.
With that he split in half the Gyrae rock.
One part remained, but part fell in the swells—
the part where Ajax sat when folly seized him.
The stone propelled him deep beneath the waves,
and there he perished, filled with briny water.
“‘Your brother Agamemnon sailed from Troy
aboard his hollow ships—with Hera’s aid—
but when he neared the steep Malean peak,
a whirling tempest snatched his ship away
and swept him, groaning, on the fish-filled sea
to lonely lands where once Thyestes lived,
to be succeeded by his son Aegisthus.
From there he had an easy voyage home.
The gods reversed the winds, and he arrived,
relieved to set a foot on native ground.
He knelt to kiss his fathers’ land, and streams
of happy tears cascaded on the earth.
A man saw him arrive, a sharp lookout
Aegisthus stationed high to watch, for pay
in gold, two talents. Through the years he watched,
lest valiant Agamemnon come unnoticed.
The lookout raced to Agamemnon’s halls,
and there Aegisthus laid his evil plan.
He chose the twenty best among his men
to hide in ambush near a sumptuous feast.
He drove out feigning welcome for the king,
devising treachery aboard his chariot.
He led the trusting monarch home and killed him
amid the feast, as one might slay an ox.
Not one of Agamemnon’s men survived,
nor any of Aegisthus’; all died there.’
“My heart was pounding as the old man spoke.
I sat on sand and wept. Deep down I ceased
to want to live or see the sun give light,
but when I had my fill of sad lament,
the ancient forthright sea god said to me:
‘Atrides, it is right you ceased to grieve.
More sorrow would accomplish nothing. Rather,
consider how to reach your fathers’ land.
Aegisthus may yet live, unless Orestes
got to him first. Then you may see the funeral.’
“When I heard his advice, the heart and soul
within my breast revived despite my grief,
and I was moved to ask the ancient man:
‘You told of two good men, but said a third
is either living still on trackless seas,
or dead. I want to hear, sad though I am.’
“Those were my words, and he forthwith explained:
‘Laertes’ son, whose home was Ithaca.
I saw him weeping on a far-off isle,
near caves of nymph Calypso, there detained
against his will. He cannot travel home
because there are no ships, no oars, no crew
who might transport him on the sea’s broad back.
“‘Gods’ will is not—Zeus-nurtured Menelaus—
for you to meet with death in Argos’ pastures.
The gods will send you to the Elysian field,
at earth’s extreme where Rhadamanthus is,
where life for mortal men is at its sweetest:
no snow, no winter storms, and little rain.
No, only steady breaths of Zephyrus,
which Ocean sends to soothe the mortals there.
To heaven you are like a son of Zeus.’
“That said, he dived beneath the salty waves.
My men and I then headed toward our ships,
my heart in turmoil as we walked along.
After we reached the sea, our ships ashore,
we made our evening meal, divine night fell
and all men went to sleep at water’s edge.
“When early Dawn’s first rosy glow appeared,
we dragged our vessels to the sacred sea,
then rigged the balanced crafts with masts and sails.
The oarsmen climbed aboard. They took their benches
in proper turn, and oars assailed the brine.
“So back we sailed to Egypt’s Zeus-poured river,
anchored the ships and made fine sacrifice.
After we soothed the everlasting gods,
I built a monument to Agamemnon,
then sailed for home. The gods gave perfect wind,
which brought me quickly to my fathers’ land.
“Now you should stay with me here in my halls
until eleven days have come, or twelve.
Then I will speed you on your way with gifts:
a team of three and well-built chariot; also
a gorgeous cup, so as you pour libations,
you will remember me for all your days.”
Telemachus addressed the king and said:
“Atrides, do not seek to keep me longer,
although I could remain with you a year,
sit here and never long for home or parents.
Just listening to you reminisce and talk
is pure delight, but my own men will chafe
in sacred Pylos should you host me further.
Whatever you give me must be compact.
I cannot take a team to Ithaca,
but give it back to you. You have the plains—
extensive fields of clover, fragrant grasses,
large-kerneled milky barley, wheat and spelt.
On Ithaca there are no fields, no race tracks,
but grazing land for goats more fair than horse pastures.
Unfit for driving teams are all the isles,
like Ithaca, whose steep slopes reach the sea.”
The words brought smiles to Menelaus’ face.
He tapped Telemachus and said to him:
“Your speech confirms your noble blood, young man!
I can revise my gifts, and so I will.
Of countless treasured items in my palace,
I will give you the finest, most revered:
a mixing bowl ornately wrought of silver,
pure silver save the rims, and they are gold,
Hephaestus’ work, a gift from Phaedimus,
Sidonian king who entertained me once
on my way home. I will give that to you.”
So those two men conversed with one another
as merrymakers filed into the halls.
They led in goats. They carried robust wine
and foods prepared by wives with festive headbands.
While Menelaus’ halls prepared for feasting,
the suitors lolled outside Odysseus’ doors,
amused themselves by throwing spear and discus
on rare flat ground, as arrogant as ever.
Antinous sat beside Eurymachus,
the suitors’ chiefs, by far the most accomplished.
Noёman, Phronius’ son, approached the two
and posed a question for Antinous:
“Antinous, do we know or do we not
how soon Telemachus will sail from Pylos?
He went aboard my ship, which now I need
to cross to Elis, where I pasture horses,
a dozen mares. Each has a nursing mule,
untamed. I want to wean a mule and break it.”
His listeners’ hearts beat fast; they never knew
the youth had gone to Pylos, likely to
the countryside, where he kept sheep and pigs.
Eupeithes’ son Antinous replied:
“Please tell me more. When did he go? What men
accompanied him? Did he take Ithacans,
or were they slaves? And if so, were they his?
Speak truthfully so I will understand
whether he took your ship against your will,
or whether you agreed to his request.”
Phronius’ son Noëman answered him:
“I let him take it. Would not anyone
if such a man—his heart beset by cares—
should ask? Refusing him would be unjust.
The island’s finest youths—except for us—
accompanied him, and one I saw on board
was Mentor—but it must have been a god,
I have to say, since I saw Mentor here
just recently, but that day he set sail.”
That said, he headed toward his father’s house
and left the brazen pair in angry moods.
They stopped the suitors’ games and bade them sit.
Eupeithes’ son Antinous addressed them.
A hateful, bitter fury blacked his heart
and made his eyes glow red like burning coals.
“A monstrous feat of arrogance is done!
Telemachus has sailed. Unthinkable!
Against our will the youth went on his own!
He took the island’s best and launched a ship!
He will make trouble soon enough unless
Zeus undermines his strength before it ripens.
Well, then, give me a ship with twenty men,
and I will lay an ambush, closely watch
the straits dividing Ithaca from Same.
His voyage to find his sire will end in ruin.”
She suitors listened. They approved his plan,
then rose and went inside Odysseus’ halls.
Penelope was not long unaware
of what the suitors planned against her son.
She learned from herald Medon, who had heard
while he stood near the courtyard where they schemed.
He went inside to tell Penelope,
and she addressed him as he crossed her threshold:
“Why did the haughty suitors send you, herald?
Are you to tell divine Odysseus’ maids
to stop their work and make another feast?
I pray that they will never court me more,
that this will be their final banquet here.
To them I say: you men have wasted much
of what Telemachus should own; you scoff
at what your fathers said—when you were small—
of how Odysseus ruled among your parents,
and never said or did an unjust thing,
in keeping with the duty monarchs owe.
Kings may despise one man, another favor,
but not a single man did he mistreat—
unlike yourselves, whose wicked hearts and deeds
are plain. You show no shred of fealty.”
Staunch Medon thoughtfully declared to her:
“Lady, I wish that were the worst there is,
but there is something far more monstrous still
that they have planned. May Zeus not let it happen!
They plan to kill your son Telemachus
as he sails home with news he went to seek
in Pylos first, in Lacedaemon second.”
Penelope felt weak in heart and limbs.
She sat a long time silently, her eyes
awash with tears, her steady voice suppressed,
until in time she regained her composure:
“Why did he go? There was no need for him
to board fast-sailing ships—the chariots
on which men travel over trackless waters.
Is he to leave no trace among mankind.”
Serceptive herald Medon answered her:
“I do not know if he himself or gods
inspired his trip, but he had hopes to learn
whether his father died or will come home.”
The herald walked away, down palace halls.
Soul-rending grief subdued her, left no will
to sit on any chair within her room.
Instead she crumpled on her chamber floor,
lamenting, piteous. Maids around her sobbed,
young maids and old, all those within her service.
Through halting moans, Penelope addressed them:
“Listen, my dear maids! Zeus gave me more grief
than any woman raised in present times!
Already I have lost my lion-like husband—
a man endowed with every sort of virtue—
whose fame spread far, from Hellas into Argos.
Now winds have snatched my cherished son away,
while I had no idea he went to sea.
You maids were cruel! Not one of you saw fit
to wake me in my bed although you knew
that he embarked aboard the hollow ship.
If I had known he pondered such a voyage,
he nonetheless would have remained at home
unless before he left I lay here dead.
Now one of you go summon aging Dolius—
my father’s gift to me the day I married,
a man to tend my gardens. He will straightway
sit down by old Laertes, tell him all,
in case perhaps that elder may resolve
to notify the people that men plan
to end Odysseus’ lineage—and his own.”
Revered nurse Eurycleia said to her:
“Dear girl, you may kill me with ruthless bronze
or let me live, but I will not deceive you.
I knew his plans and gave him what he asked,
sweet wine and bread, but he required an oath
that I not tell you till twelve days elapsed,
unless you heard before then he was gone.
He thought he might return before you knew.
Now bathe yourself and choose clean clothes to wear.
Then here within your chambers join us maids
and pray to aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter,
who may preserve Telemachus from death.
Leave old Laertes be. I do not think
the blessed gods detest Arcesius’ stock.
A scion of his will stay alive to hold
these high-roofed halls and vast surrounding lands.”
The words subdued the queen’s lament and tears.
She bathed herself, selected clothes to wear
and joined her handmaids in her upstairs rooms.
She filled a tray with barley grains and prayed:
“O aegis-keeping Zeus’s tireless daughter,
if ever in these halls Odysseus did
burn fat-wrapped thighs of ox or sheep for you,
remember them for me! Rescue my boy!
Defeat the strutting suitors’ wicked plot.”
She cried aloud; the goddess heard her prayer.
The suitors reveled through the shadowy halls,
and one among the arrogant youths might say:
“No doubt the queen will soon wed one of us,
though she is unaware her son will die.”
So one might say, not knowing what would be.
Antinous declared among the men:
“Are you men mad? Rein in your careless speech,
lest someone overhear and tell inside.
But let us quietly rise and carry out
the plan that each of us agreed upon.”
Sntinous chose twenty men, the best,
who strutted toward the shore and waiting ship.
They dragged the vessel out to deeper surf,
set up the mast and put the sail aboard.
They fixed the oars to tholes by means of thongs,
and raised the chalky sail but kept it furled.
Enthusiastic aides brought arms aboard.
The sailors moored the vessel, disembarked
and sat to eat, awaiting eventide.
In circumspect Penelope’s high room,
she lay in bed refusing food or drink,
and wondered if her son would slip past death
or lose his life at vicious suitors’ hands.
As when, encountering men, a lion frets,
unnerved to see them circle him by stealth,
so she was fretting till sweet sleep arrived.
She then leaned back and slumbered, limbs relaxed.
But gleaming-eyed Athena had a thought,
and she devised a phantom like a woman,
Iphthime, valorous Icarius’ daughter,
who married Phera-dweller Eumelus.
Athena placed her in Odysseus’ halls
to check Penelope’s lament, her grief,
her weeping, moaning, sorrow, flowing tears.
The phantom loosed the latch, walked in her room,
hovered above her head and spoke to her:
“Are you asleep, Penelope, sad soul?
The gods who live at ease would have you stop
your tears and sadness! He will yet return,
your son, who has not sinned against immortals.”
Cautious Penelope replied to her
while still asleep but at the gate of dreams:
“Why, sister, are you here? A long time passed
since you last came; you live so far away.
You tell me I should stop the sad lament
that stems from torment in my mind and heart.
Already I have lost my lion-like husband—
a man endowed with every sort of virtue—
whose fame spread far, from Hellas into Argos.
And now my son has gone aboard a ship,
a child who knows not battle or debate.
I worry more for him than for Odysseus.
I fear for him, the trials he may encounter—
at sea or in the land where he has gone.
A group of men who hate him have conspired
to murder him while he is sailing home.”
To that, the phantom apparition said:
“Take heart and do not entertain such fears.
He has a guard, the same that other men
have swayed to stand by them and use her power.
Pallas Athena pities you this heartache
and sent me here to say these things to you.”
Demure Penelope inquired of her:
“Now, if you are a god, or hear gods’ voices,
tell me as well about my suffering husband.
Does he still live and see the radiant sun,
or has he died and gone to Hades’ realm.”
Snswering her, the shadowy phantom said:
“I will not answer you about that man,
alive or dead. You have no need to know.”
Shat said, she raised the latch and disappeared,
lost in the winds. The woman rose from sleep,
Icarius’ daughter, heart revivified,
thanks to the dream that came through gloomy night.
Meanwhile the suitors sailed their watery course,
intent upon Telemachus’ demise.
A rocky island rises in the sea—
midway of rugged Ithaca and Same—
called Asteris, with anchorage for ships
on either side. They laid their ambush there.


Book 5

Dawn, after sleeping by revered Tithonus,
arose and brought her light to gods and men.
The gods assembled, sitting; in their midst
far-thundering Zeus, the mightiest, reclined.
Athena spoke about Odysseus’ trials
and her desire to free him from his captor:
“O Father Zeus, all deathless, blessed gods,
never again should there exist a kindly
sceptered monarch, nor one who has a just heart!
Henceforth let kings be harsh and work injustice,
since none of you recalls the way Odysseus
governed his folk as gently as a father.
He suffers grievous pain upon an island,
against his will in nymph Calypso’s caves.
He has no means to reach his fathers’ land.
No ships are there, no oars, nor any crew
who might convey him on the sea’s broad back.
Bad men are poised to kill his cherished son
on his way home. He sought word of his sire
in sacred Pylos, then in Lacedaemon.”
She cloud-accumulator Zeus replied:
“My child, what kind of speech flew past your teeth?
Did you yourself not lay a plan before
in which Odysseus takes revenge, returning?
Escort Telemachus—you have the power—
so he will reach his fathers’ land unscathed,
and let the suitors sail back empty-handed.”
He then addressed his dear son Hermes, saying:
“Hermes, our messenger since times long past,
inform the fair-tressed nymph: it is my will
that stalwart, bold Odysseus sail home now,
without escort—no god, no mortal man—
but on a raft of logs, through more ordeals
for twenty days until he reaches Scheria,
Phaeacians’ land, a people like immortals.
They will receive him as they would a god,
and will transport him to his fathers’ country,
giving him vast amounts of gold and bronze,
far more than he would have from Trojan spoils
had his allotment made it home with him.
His fate is by such means to see close kin,
his fathers’ land, and high-roofed halls built there.”
The Argus-slaying messenger obeyed.
Beneath his feet he tied his marvelous sandals,
eternal gold, which bore him over waters
and boundless lands as fast as breaths of wind.
He grasped the wand that caused men’s eyes to close,
if that should be his wish, or else to open.
With that in hand, the Argus-slayer flew.
At Pieria he dropped from sky to sea
and skimmed the waves as might the cormorant
who, in the restless deep’s enormous troughs,
dampens his wings with brine to capture fish.
Like that bird, Hermes crossed the endless waves
until he neared the island, faraway.
He hastened from the purple sea to land
so he could reach the cave in which the nymph
resided, and indeed he found her there.
Atop the hearth, a hot fire roared. Its scent—
of fragrant fine-split cedar—filled the isle.
The nymph Calypso sang—a lovely voice—
and worked a golden shuttle in her loom.
Around her cave an ancient forest grew,
black poplar, alder, cypress, sweet to smell.
High in the trees were nests of long-winged birds,
sea crows with slender beaks, horned owls and falcons,
all birds who plied the sea and had no cares.
Also about the hollow cave there stretched
prolific vines from which grape clusters hung.
A bank of four springs spouted brilliant water;
each of the four spouts flowed a different way.
Nearby were meadows, celery and violets.
Any immortal god who reached that place
would find himself entranced to see such beauty,
as was the Argus-slayer, who stopped and stared.
When Hermes finished drinking in the scene,
he went inside the breezy cave, where she,
Calypso, goddess divine, acknowledged him.
The gods are not unknown to one another,
however far apart their homes may lie.
But he did not find bold Odysseus there.
The man patrolled the shore, as was his wont,
his soul distressed amid the tears and groans
of weeping while he gazed on restless seas.
Brilliant goddess Calypso questioned Hermes
after she offered him a glittering throne:
“Why, Hermes, do you come with your gold staff?
I love and honor you, but you come seldom.
Tell me your wish! My heart bids me comply
if it is something I have power to do.
Come, let me treat you as an honored guest!”
That said, the goddess placed by him a table,
ambrosia-filled, and mixed a ruby nectar.
The Argus-slaying courier ate and drank,
but after dining to his heart’s content
he spoke to her, responding to her question:
“Goddess, you asked me why I came to you,
and since you asked me I will speak the truth.
Zeus sent me here, unwilling though I was—
for who would want to cross the briny deep
to where there is no town of mortal men
or sacrifice of choicest hecatombs?
But lesser gods can never nullify
or skirt the will of aegis-keeping Zeus.
He said you hold a man, the most accursed
of those who fought at Priam’s citadel
for nine long years till in the tenth they sacked it.
While they were sailing home, they vexed Athena,
and she aroused storm winds with towering waves
in which the man’s devoted comrades died
while wind-whipped swells conveyed him close to here.
Now Zeus commands you set him free forthwith.
His lot is not to perish far from loved ones.
His fate is once again to see close kin,
his fathers’ land, and high-roofed halls built there.”
At those peremptory words, Calypso trembled,
and when she found her voice she said to him:
“You gods are cruel, and jealous most of all!
You grudge the goddesses who bed a mortal
and treat him like a husband openly.
So was it when Dawn’s fingers snatched Orion.
You gods who live at ease denied her that,
and on Ortygia, gold-throned Artemis
shot him with gentle arrows, took his life.
So was it when Demeter and Iasion
united when her passion took control
atop a thrice-plowed field, but when Zeus heard,
he cast a silver thunderbolt that killed him.
So now you gods grudge me my mortal man.
I saved him, found him floating on a keel,
alone, because a dazzling thunderbolt
from Zeus had split his ship in wine-hued seas,
and with that strike his trusty comrades died.
In time the wind and waves brought him to me.
I love the man, I nurtured him, I wished
to make him ageless, deathless, evermore.
But now, since lesser gods can never thwart
or skirt the will of aegis-keeping Zeus,
the man may go—if Zeus has so ordained—
but how is he to fare? I have no means.
No ships are here, no oarsmen, no comrades,
who might transport him on the sea’s broad back,
but I will counsel him, without deceit,
that Zeus insists he reach his land unscathed.”
The Argus-slaying courier said to her:
“Send him away, avoid the wrath of Zeus,
and Zeus will not hereafter punish you.”
That said, the Argus-slayer took his leave.
The regal nymph went promptly to Odysseus,
for she would bow to Zeus’s messenger.
She found him yet upon the shore. His eyes
still filled with bitter tears. His sweet life ebbed
while he, tired of Calypso, yearned for home.
He had no choice except to sleep with her,
unwilling slave to her more forceful will,
but every day he sat beside the shore
and sorrow racked his heart. He groaned, he wept,
he gazed at trackless seas as tears flowed on.
The brilliant goddess stood by him and said:
“Poor wretch, you will no longer have to suffer,
pining away, for I will send you homeward.
Come on! Bring tools and cut stout logs to make
a raft. Above the logs construct a deck
on which you may traverse the foggy seas.
I will provide you food, water and wine—
to ward off hunger, satisfy your belly—
and clothes. Behind you I will send a breeze
so you may reach your fathers’ land unharmed,
since that is what the heaven-dwellers wish,
gods mightier than I, who have their way.”
Long-suffering divine Odysseus frowned
before he spoke an answer back to her:
“I fear you plan more than you tell me now.
Why do you bid me cross the sea by raft?
That dangerous passage no seaworthy ship
could make, despite a friendly Zeus-sent wind.
I will not build or board the raft unless
you, goddess, deign to swear a solemn oath
that this is not a plan to bring me harm.”
Calypso, fair as any goddess, smiled,
caressed his hand and spoke assuringly:
“You are no fool, but certainly a rebel
to dare proclaim such brazen things to me.
Let earth be witness, endless skies above,
and Styx’s buried stream, which is the strongest,
most dreaded object blessed gods can swear on:
For you I never did or will plan harm.
What I proposed, and still propose for you,
I would perform myself should need arise.
My mind is fair and just, nor is the heart
inside my chest like iron, but merciful.”
Her oath complete, the brilliant goddess led;
Odysseus followed, stepping in her footprints.
Goddess and man soon reached her roomy cave,
and he assumed the throne that Hermes left.
The nymph prepared a cornucopia,
the kinds of food and beverage mortals take.
After she took a seat that faced Odysseus,
her handmaids served her nectar and ambrosia.
The diners’ hands reached out for savory treats.
After the two enjoyed their food and drink,
goddess Calypso was the first to speak:
“Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
are you determined now to travel home,
regain your fathers’ land? Do as you please,
but if your mind could see what is in store—
the trials you must endure while on your voyage—
you would stay here with me, protect my caves
and be immortal. Quench desire to meet
the lawful wife for whom you pine each day.
I surely do not think she outshines me
in comeliness. It is impossible
for mortal face or shape to rival mine.”
The man of countless wiles replied to her:
“Do not be angry, honored goddess. I know
full well Penelope—compared with you—
falls short by far in stature, shape and beauty,
for she is mortal. You will never age.
Yet even so, through every day I long
to live to see the day when I return,
and if the gods afflict me while I sail,
I will endure, maintain my hardy spirit.
Already I have made it through ordeals
on waves, in war. Let new ones have their day!”
At that, the sun went down and darkness fell.
The two sought out the hollow cave’s far reaches,
and there they stayed the night in love’s enchantment.
When Dawn ignited day with coral hands,
Odysseus quickly dressed in cloak and tunic.
Calypso chose a long white robe to wear,
fine-spun. She tightened round her waist a belt
of gold, and fastened on her hair a veil.
She then procured the tools to build a raft.
She handed him a double-bitted axe,
two sharpened edges, bronze, its head atop
a solid olive haft, a perfect fit.
She gave him, too, an adze, then led the way
to where the forest trees grew tall and straight:
black alder, poplar, firs that brushed the sky,
dead long ago and cured to float with ease.
After she showed him where the long trunks stood,
Calypso, gorgeous goddess, went back home
and left him cutting logs, which he soon finished.
Twenty he felled, then used the adze to shape
and neatly smooth them till they were aligned.
Meantime the goddess carried back an auger.
He drilled the logs and fastened them together
with pegs until he had a solid slab.
As when a man lays out a vessel’s hull,
a ship made broad of beam to carry freight,
as broad as that, Odysseus made his raft.
He put in place a deck, securely braced,
and raised around the edges gunwale walls.
He made a mast, a yard to hang a sail,
and fashioned next a helm to steer the craft.
He tucked green willow strips in every crack
to seal out waves, and backed the strips with pitch.
While he was building, she produced stout canvas
to make a sail, which he created neatly.
He rigged it, foot and yard, with sheets and halyards.
That done, he launched his raft in shallow water.
Within four days his project was complete,
and on the fifth Calypso let him go,
but first she bathed him, gave him fragrant clothes.
Aboard she placed a skin of mellow wine,
an even larger water skin, and food—
a knapsack filled with meats of every sort.
She summoned up a warm and gentle breeze.
Odysseus raised his sail to catch the wind
and took the helm to deftly steer his craft.
He sat astern, and sleep bypassed his eyes
while he admired the Pleiades, Boötes,
and Bear—stars other people call the Wagon—
which always turns so it can watch Orion
and is—alone—denied a bath in Ocean.
Goddess Calypso had advised the man
to steer so as to keep the Bear to leftward.
Seventeen days he sailed across the sea,
and on the eighteenth he saw shady mountains,
Phaeacians’ land, which he was drawing near.
The land lay on the sea as might a shield.
Poseidon, on his way from Ethiopia,
looked out from Solymi peaks and saw Odysseus
sailing his course. Poseidon’s heart grew angry,
and he addressed himself, shaking his head:
“Aha! The other gods must have conspired
to aid Odysseus while I was away.
He nears Phaeacians’ land, where he is fated—
if he arrives—to be set free of trials,
but I intend to make him suffer more.”
That said, he gathered clouds and stirred the sea.
He grasped his trident, summoned whirling winds
from every point. He used the clouds to hide
the land, the sea as well. He brought on night.
Gales from the south met howling Zephyrus,
and Boreas blew from ether, raised huge waves.
Odysseus’ knees and heart began to flag.
He spoke a word to his intrepid soul:
“O wretched man! What will become of me?
I fear that what the goddess said was true:
before I cross the sea and reach my shores,
woes will engulf me. So it happens now,
as Zeus erects these clouds across the sky,
spurs whirlwinds on and agitates the deep.
Now doom for me is surely close at hand.
Thrice blest—or more—were those Argives who fell
while serving Atreus’ sons in far-off Troy.
If only I had met my fate and died
when Trojans hurled so many spears at me
around the corpse of Peleus’ fallen son.
Greeks would have buried me and spread my fame,
but now my lot is ignominious death.”
As he said that, a monstrous wave crashed down.
It struck the raft and spun it like a top,
wrested the helm he held, and cast him, helpless,
over the side. His tall mast snapped in half
beneath the full assault of whirling winds;
his sail and yardarm toppled leagues away.
He stayed submerged and could not draw a breath,
or breast and float atop the giant waves.
The clothes Calypso gave him weighed him down.
At length he made the surface, spitting brine,
which drained from every recess in his head.
Though nearly spent, he did not lose his raft.
He plunged through waves to where it bobbed and grasped it,
then sat amid the logs and cheated death.
Great waves propelled the raft this way and that,
as when late summer winds drive thistledown
across a plain—dense clouds of silky seeds.
So then winds tossed the raft now here, now there:
at times the south winds cast it to the north,
at times the east winds drove it to the west.
Slim-ankled Ino noticed, Cadmus’ daughter,
renamed Leukothea when, though once a mortal,
she came to be a goddess of high seas.
She pitied lost Odysseus’ mounting hardships.
She rose above the waves as might a seabird,
sat on the raft and spoke a word to him:
“Poor wretched man, why is the tremor-maker
raging at you, devising endless trials?
Though furious, he does not elect to kill you.
You do not seem a fool. Take my advice.
Remove your clothes and give the winds your raft.
Use mighty arms to swim until you reach
Phaeacians’ land, where fate will set you free.
Here, tie this charmed headband around your chest.
With this you need not fear more trials, or death,
but when at length your fingers touch the shore,
untie and throw the band in wine-hued waters
with all your might, and look the other way.”
That said, the goddess handed him her band
and dived again beneath the rolling swells
as might a cormorant. The waves concealed her.
Long-suffering, divine Odysseus worried,
and he addressed his own intrepid heart:
“Ah me, what trap has one of them set now—
a god who says I should forsake my raft.
No, I will not. That land is distant still,
the land where she said I would find release.
I will adopt another, better plan.
As long as my raft’s timbers stay intact,
I will remain aboard it, come what may,
but if a wave should smash my raft to bits,
then I will swim—for lack of better choice.”
Shile he, Odysseus, pondered what to do,
Poseidon roused a giant curling wave—
a frightful swell—and drove it on the man.
As when fierce wind assails a heap of chaff—
dry chaff—till dust is scattered everywhere,
so did the ropes and timbers fly. Odysseus
straddled a log as might a race-horse rider.
He stripped away the clothes Calypso gave him,
fastened the goddess’ headband round his chest
and dove into the brine with arms outstretched,
eager to swim. The tremor-maker watched
and shook his head while saying to himself:
“Now let him roam the seas, find tribulations,
until he makes his way to Zeus-bred mortals.
He never will forget the woes I gave him.”
Saving said that, he lashed his flax-maned team
and soon reached Aegae, where his palace stood.
Athena, Zeus’s daughter, also planned.
She blocked the paths of every wind but one.
She bade them settle down and go to sleep,
except the north, for whom she cleaved the waves
so Zeus-begat Odysseus might soon reach
the rowing-fond Phaeacians, dodging death.
Two days and nights, gigantic troughs and swells
assailed the man until his heart despaired,
but when Dawn’s golden tresses lit a third day,
the wind abated, left the water’s face
in breathless calm. He then made out dry land,
straining his eyes atop the highest billow.
As when young children see their father lives
after he suffered, helpless, gravely ill,
oppressed a long time under evil spells,
till heaven finally set him free from sickness,
so did Odysseus welcome sight of shore.
He struck out swimming, keen to step on earth.
But when he neared the land, in shouting distance,
he heard the roar of reefs in seas ahead
where massive waves redoubled toward the coast,
bellowed and boomed, made water turn to foam.
There was no place where ships might rest, no harbor,
only a rocky coastline, reefs and cliffs.
At that, Odysseus’ knees and heart went limp,
and he addressed his valiant soul, discouraged:
“Ah me, Zeus granted that I see the land—
exceeding hopes I held on endless seas—
but not that I set foot there, leave the water.
Ahead lie jagged rocks beset by waves
that surge and crash. Above, sheer cliffs arise
at water’s edge. There is no place for foot
to hold and let me climb to my escape.
I dare not head toward the stony cliffs
lest huge waves seize me, make my struggle futile.
But should I swim on down the coast to find
a sloping shore, or calm protected bay,
I fear a storm may once more snatch me up,
return me to the trackless deep again,
or else a god might loose a monster on me,
the kind that Amphitrite rears in droves.
How well I know Poseidon seeks my torment.”
While he was brooding, wondering what to do,
a monstrous wave propelled him toward the coast—
toward lacerated skin and broken bones
but for a thought bright-eyed Athena sent him.
The wave propelled him to a monolith.
He gripped it tight until the wave passed by
and thus survived, but as the same wave ebbed,
it broke his hold and drove him far offshore.
When from its lair an octopus is dragged,
its suckers cling and tear packed pebbles loose;
thus did the sharp rock rip Odysseus’ skin,
bloody his sturdy hands. The wave engulfed him.
He would have surely died, defying fate,
had not Athena sent another thought.
He dove beyond the waves that broke near shore,
and swam beside them, eyes on land to seek
an inlet, else a place where sand sloped up,
but when he saw a flowing river’s mouth,
it seemed to him to be the ideal place:
wind-sheltered, smooth, and not a rock in sight.
He saw the river’s holy streams and prayed:
“Do hear me, lord, whoever you may be!
I flee the wrath Poseidon’s sea has dealt.
Immortal gods will often show respect
to mortal men who wander as I have.
From countless trials I reach your streams, your knees.
Take pity, lord, your supplicant entreats!”
The deity paused his flow. He blocked the waves,
created calm before him, saved the man
within his mouth. Odysseus’ knees went limp,
his arms collapsed. The sea had crushed his spirit.
His limbs were swollen; pent-up water oozed
from mouth and nostrils. Breathless, silently,
he lay—almost unconscious—vigor gone.
In time he came around, regained his wits.
He loosed the goddess’ headband round his chest
and dropped it in the river’s brackish mouth.
A billow bore it down the streams to Ino,
and she retrieved it. He then left the river,
bent down in rushes, kissed the fruitful earth
and once again addressed his valiant soul:
“What will befall me now? Where will it end?
If I should pass the night beside the river,
might not the icy dew, the biting frost
defeat my feeble heart, worn as it is,
toward morning when the coldest breezes blow?
Yet if I climb the slope to shady woods
and hide in thickets there, I might be safe
from cold, but when I drowse, or sleep arrives,
I fear I may become a wild beast’s prey.”
At length he chose to take the latter course.
He searched for trees and found a grove near water,
a hillock where he crawled beneath two shrubs
that intertwined—an olive meshed with thorn.
No chill, damp winds could penetrate the copse,
nor could the sun’s bright rays infiltrate there,
nor could the winter rains seep in—so tight,
so interweaved the bushes grew. He crept
beneath and with his hands scooped out a bed.
He gathered fallen leaves that lay about,
enough to shield a pair of men, or three,
from winter’s cold, no matter how severe.
Fatigued, Odysseus smiled, pleased with his work.
He lay down there and heaped on still more leaves.
As when a man banks ashes over coals—
an isolated man who has no neighbors—
to keep his fire, lest he must start a new one,
so did Odysseus hide in leaves. Athena
sprinkled his eyes with sleep, to bring an end
to weariness, and soon his eyelids closed.


Book 6

So there he lay, resolute Odysseus—
exhausted, deep in sleep. Athena, meanwhile,
entered the town, Phaeacian people’s city,
ingenious folk who once held Hyperia,
a land too near the brutish, swaggering Cyclops,
who used their greater might to loot Phaeacians
until Nausithous rose up, led them
to settle Scheria, far from toiling mortals.
He raised a wall—a citadel—built homes,
built shrines to honor gods, apportioned land.
Now he was gone to Hades, quelled by fate;
instead Alcinous ruled, with heaven’s guidance.
The bright-eyed goddess stole inside his halls,
devising how Odysseus would sail home.
She found an ornate chamber with a girl,
asleep, her form and face both goddesslike.
She was Nausicaa, Alcinous’ daughter.
Two handmaids, whom the Graces granted beauty,
stood guard inside her tightly bolted door.
As might a puff of wind, Athena rose,
hovered above the young girl’s face and spoke,
disguised as far-famed seaman Dymas’ daughter,
a favored friend Nausicaa’s same age.
Resembling her, the bright-eyed goddess said:
“Nausicaa, have you always been careless?
Your lovely clothes lie filthy on the floor.
Your time to marry nears. These days you need
to take more pride in how your garments look,
for that is how to gain respect from men,
a good repute to satisfy your parents.
So let us go at dawn to launder clothes.
I will lend you a hand and speed your work
so you can end your days of maidenhood.
The best Phaeacian youths already woo,
young men who boast a lineage much like yours.
When dawn arrives, persuade your eminent father
to rig a mule and wagon, sufficient for
your gowns, your girdles, brightly colored garments,
and you as well, who ought to ride, not walk,
as far from town as are the laundering pools.”
That said, the bright-eyed goddess disappeared,
made for Olympus, home of deathless gods,
where winds do not assail, nor do the rains,
and snowflakes never fall. The ether, rather,
surrounds the mountain, bathed in brilliant light.
There, where the gods enjoy eternal ease,
Athena flew, having planted her plan.
Dawn’s earliest light aroused the sleeping princess,
Nausicaa, astonished by her dream.
She hurried through the halls to seek her parents,
her sire and mother, both of whom she found.
Her mother sat with maids beside the hearth,
spinning a purple weaving thread. Her sire
was on his way outside to join the kings
in council that Phaeacian lords had called.
She stood before her honored sire and said:
“Dear Papa, will you ready me a wagon,
high-wheeled, so I can take my finest gowns—
disgraceful now—to wash in river waters?
Proper it is, when you go meet the chiefs
and give advice, to have clean clothes to wear.
There are five sons of yours inside these halls.
A pair have wed; the other three are courting,
and they must have their clothing freshly laundered
when they go dancing. I have like concerns.”
She was ashamed to mention wedlock’s joy,
but he perceived her mind and answered her:
“The team is yours, my child, and more besides.
So go, and let my servants hitch the dray,
the high-wheeled one that has a cargo box.”
Se so bade servants, who were quick to act.
Outside they fixed shafts to a four-wheeled cart
and hitched a team of mules beneath the yoke.
The girl brought from her chamber shimmering garments
and stowed the clothes aboard the sturdy wagon.
Her mother filled a box with tasty foods,
including roasted meats, and added wine,
a goatskin bag. The daughter climbed aboard.
Her mother handed up a flask of oil
with which the traveling girls could oil their skin.
Nausicaa took up the whip and reins
and slapped the team until they clopped away.
The tireless mules pulled, carrying clothes and girl,
but not just her—the handmaids rode as well.
In time they reached the sparkling river currents
and ancient laundering pools where constant streams
washed soft white sand, so excellent for dirt.
They freed the mules—took off the wagon’s yoke—
and turned them loose beside the whirling river
to graze on tender streamside plants. The girls
picked up the garments, sank them in dark pools,
and trod the clothes as if they played a game.
The women washed till all the dirt was gone.
They spread the laundry by the nearby shore,
on pebbles polished smooth by ceaseless waves.
The girls then bathed, they rubbed on olive oil,
and sat to eat their food at river’s edge
while rays of sunshine dried the laundered clothes.
After the maids and mistress savored food,
they cast aside their veils and tossed a ball,
Nausicaa the loveliest by far.
As when the archer Artemis roams the peaks—
like high Taygetus or Erymanthus—
she thrills at seeing boars, or nimble deer,
while round the goddess Zeus’s pretty daughters,
wood nymphs, gambol and play, delighting Leto,
but Artemis’ head and face outshine the nymphs,
by far preeminent though nymphs are lovely,
so did the unwed girl outshine her servants.
When time arrived for them to travel home,
they packed the laundered clothes and yoked the mules.
Athena, though, had something else in mind:
waken Odysseus, let him see the girl,
and let her lead him to Phaeacians’ city.
The princess threw the ball toward a maid;
it passed her, disappeared in whirling depths.
The women shrieked. Odysseus heard and woke,
sat up and pondered deep in heart and soul:
“Ah me, what mortals’ country have I found?
Are they unruly, arrogant, unjust,
or do they fear the gods and welcome strangers?
The shouts that reached me sounded like young women’s—
perhaps the nymphs who haunt steep mountain slopes,
the springs where rivers rise, and watery dells.
Could there be mortal folk who speak nearby?
Well, I will have a look myself and learn.”
Odysseus crept from underneath the shrubs.
With powerful hands he snapped a sapling’s stem,
a leafy shoot to hide his manly parts.
He moved as might a seasoned mountain lion
who strides through driving wind and rain, his eyes
ablaze like fire, in search of oxen, sheep,
wild-ranging deer—unless his belly bids
him raid a farm and taste the cattle there.
Like him, Odysseus neared the fair young women,
despite his nakedness; he had no choice.
To them he looked repulsive, caked in brine,
and they ran terrified this way and that,
except Alcinous’ child, in whom Athena
steeled the heart and stayed her limbs from tremors.
She faced Odysseus while he weighed two choices,
either to clasp her knees and humbly beg
or keep his distance, using courteous speech
to ask for clothes and transport to her city.
He settled on the latter course as wise:
maintain his distance, speak with mellow words;
she might recoil if he should clasp her knees.
So mellow words he spoke, and cunning too:
“Lady, I pray! Are you divine or mortal?
If you are one of those who hold the skies,
almighty Zeus’s daughter Artemis
would be the one your face and form are like,
but if you be of earth-bound mortal blood,
thrice blessed are your sire, your honored mother—
thrice blest your brothers, too, whose hearts must be
swollen with pride because of you, their sister,
whenever they see you begin to dance.
But blest by far beyond your kin is he
who leads you home with lavish wooing gifts,
for these two eyes have never seen your like,
woman or man. Your sight has me transfixed.
In Delos once, beside Apollo’s shrine,
I saw a wondrous newly sprouted palm
(a countless host of men and I paused there
amid a voyage that would engender woes).
That sight, like sight of you, transfixed my heart,
since no such tree has ever sprung from earth.
So is it now. I am awestruck but fear
to clasp your knees. Hard sorrow weighs me down.
I have been lost at sea for twenty days,
till ceaseless waves and tempests carried me
from isle Ogygia here where heaven wills
yet more hardship and grief for me. I doubt
my ills will end before gods try me more.
Pity me, queen! I suffered legion toils
till I met you. I do not know another
of those who occupy your land or town.
Show me your city, give me rags to wear,
such as the wraps you brought your laundry in.
May heaven give you everything you want—
a home, a man, a mate alike in mind—
for there is nothing more to be desired
than when two share a house agreeably,
woman and man. Their rivals envy them,
their friends admire, they win a good repute.”
White-armed Nausicaa faced him and said:
“Stranger, you do not seem a fool, or wicked.
Olympian Zeus allots us mortals fortune
to suit his pleasure, be we base or noble.
He likely dealt the trials you must endure.
Now that you have appeared in this, our land,
you will not want for clothes or any boon
that may befit a suppliant who comes here.
I will take you to town and tell of us.
Phaeacians rule this countryside and city.
I am a child of bold Alcinous,
who holds the sovereignty among Phaeacians.”
Nausicaa called and told her fair-tressed maids:
“Come back, handmaids! Why do you fear the man?
Do you take him to be a dangerous brigand?
No man exists, nor will one ever be,
who might arrive in our Phaeacian realm
and do us harm. The gods love us too much.
We live too far across the boisterous waves,
remote, where other mortals seldom come.
But one has roamed here now, a lonesome wretch,
and we must care for him. From Zeus come men
who roam and beg. They are his treasured gifts.
So, handmaids, give our guest some food, some drink,
a bath in river waters, screened from wind.”
The handmaids calmed. They called to one another
and found a sheltered place to seat Odysseus,
obedient to Nausicaa’s command.
They placed beside him garments—cloak and tunic.
They handed him the flask of olive oil,
and bade him bathe himself in river streams,
but bold Odysseus answered, told the girls:
“Step back a distance, maids; leave me alone
to cleanse the brine and salve my skin with ointment,
which has not touched my body for an age.
With you so near, I will not bathe—ashamed
to be unclothed among you fair young women.”
The handmaids told their mistress what he said.
In river streams godlike Odysseus washed
the brine that caked his powerful back and shoulders.
He cleaned his head of foam the sea had spewed.
After he bathed and rubbed on viscous oil,
he dressed himself in clothes the girls had left.
Athena, Zeus’s daughter, made the man
appear more tall, more broad, and from his head
she hung thick hair resembling hyacinths.
As when a craftsman inlays gold in silver,
a man Athena and Hephaestus taught
the skills required to make exquisite things,
so did the goddess shower him with grace.
He walked away and sat at water’s edge,
exuding charm. The maiden eyed him closely,
then spoke a word among her fair-tressed maids:
“Listen to me, handmaids, while I say this:
the gods who hold Olympus would approve
should he, this man, remain among Phaeacians.
At first he seemed to me undignified,
but now looks like the gods who hold the heavens.
If only such as he would be my husband,
and vow to stay and make his home with me!
Now give the stranger food and drink, handmaids!”
The handmaids heard, and they obeyed forthwith
by setting food and drink beside Odysseus.
Long-suffering Odysseus ate and drank,
voracious after lacking food so long.
White-armed Nausicaa then had a thought.
She placed the folded clothes within the cart,
hitched up the strong-hoofed mules and climbed aboard.
She faced Odysseus as she said to him:
“Come, guest, we go to town! I will escort you
straight to my father’s house, where I predict
that you will meet the most esteemed Phaeacians.
Remain alert and do as I suggest.
While we are in the farms and countryside,
walk swiftly with my maids behind the mules
and cart, which I will drive to lead the way
until we come upon a city wall,
built high, encircled by a lovely harbor—
but for a walkway. Ships will line our route,
each one drawn up above its private dock.
A meeting place surrounds Poseidon’s shrine.
The streets are paved with great half-buried stones.
The men about will tend their dusky ships—
their sails, their ropes—and some will taper oars.
Phaeacians do not care for bows or quivers.
No, their delight is sailing hoary seas.
I hate their rowdy sailors’ talk, and one
may criticize me, some presumptuous man.
If we meet such a man, he might well say:
‘What handsome man is with Nausicaa,
a foreigner she found? Now they will wed.
She must have rescued him, his ship blown here
from men far off, since there are none nearby.
Perhaps he is a god that she convinced
to drop from heaven, stay with her forever.
It will be well if she should marry one
from somewhere else. She spurns the local men,
those fine Phaeacians who have courted her.’
So men may say, and I would be ashamed.
I too would scorn a girl if she should stoop
to violate her parents’ stern command
and give herself to men before her marriage.
Guest, listen closely so that you may soon
obtain my father’s men to sail you home.
The road will pass Athena’s sacred grove
of poplars round a spring. There spreads a mead
where Father has his private lands and orchards,
as far from town as one man’s shout will carry.
Wait there enough time for my maids and me
to reach my father’s halls within the city.
When you believe we are within his palace,
enter the town yourself and ask the way
to brave Alcinous’ halls, where Father dwells.
A child you meet could easily lead you there,
since there is nothing in Phaeacians’ town
to rival famed Alcinous’ high-roofed halls.
Pass through the courtyard, through the palace doors,
across the great hall’s floor until you reach
the hearthside where my mother sits in firelight,
twisting a purple thread around a spindle.
She leans against a pillar, maids at hand.
My father on his throne reclines near her
and sips his wine as might a deathless god.
Slip past the king and throw your arms around
my mother’s knees—beg means to reach your home,
your land, however far away it lies.
If she is fond of you—you please her heart—
you may with reason hope to see your loved ones,
familiar well-built halls, your fathers’ country.”
That said, she took the glossy whip and flicked
the team of mules, who left the river’s streams,
plodding ahead on strong, high-stepping hooves.
She drove them keeping pace with those on foot—
maids and Odysseus—so she spared the whip.
The sun set just as they approached the grove,
Athena’s sanctum, where Odysseus sat
and prayed at once to mighty Zeus’s daughter:
“Tireless daughter of aegis-keeping Zeus,
at this time hear me, though you never did
when earth-shaking Poseidon left me wrecked.
Let the Phaeacians welcome and assist me!”
That was his prayer, and Pallas Athena heard,
but she did not respond, deferring to
her father’s brother, who was bent on rage
until Odysseus reached his fathers’ land.


Book 7

While resolute Odysseus paused in prayer,
the sturdy mules conveyed the girl to town,
and when she reached her father’s stately halls,
the entranceway, she stopped the team. Her brothers,
each like a god, appeared, unhitched the mules,
emptied the cart and took the clothes inside.
Nausicaa went upstairs, where Eurymedusa,
her old Apiraean maid, prepared a fire.
A graceful ship brought her from Apiraea,
a prize of honor for Alcinous,
king of Phaeacians, deemed by them divine.
She raised Nausicaa in Alcinous’ halls,
where now she lit a fire and readied supper.
Meanwhile Odysseus neared the town. Athena,
kindly disposed to him, poured down a mist
lest he should meet a meddlesome Phaeacian
who might deride him, ask his business there.
When he had almost reached the pleasing city,
bright-eyed Athena met him on the road,
disguised to look as if she were a young girl.
She stood before Odysseus, who inquired:
“Child, will you show me where there dwells a man,
Alcinous, who rules the mortals here?
I seek his hospitality. I roamed
from earth’s most distant edge, and I know none
of those who occupy this land and town.”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered him:
“The place that you inquire of, elder stranger,
is near my father’s house, and I will show you,
but go in silence while I lead the way.
Do not look straight at any man, or speak,
for people here do not meet strangers often,
and they will not befriend a man from elsewhere.
They trust in ships that almost instantly
traverse the seas. Poseidon gave them wondrous
vessels as fast as flying birds, or thoughts.”
That said, the bright-eyed goddess took the lead,
a rapid pace, and he stepped in her prints.
Phaeacian seamen did not notice him
as he passed into town. Athena saw
to that: around the man the goddess poured
divine black night, affection in her heart.
Odysseus saw the bays, the balanced ships,
the warriors’ meeting place, the city wall
of pointed stakes, all wonders to behold.
When they approached the monarch’s peerless halls,
the bright-eyed goddess broke the silence, saying:
“Elderly guest, this is where you asked me
to lead you. You will find Zeus-nurtured kings
at banquet here, but do not let your heart
be timid. Self-assurance will work better—
accomplish more—though you come from afar.
Inside you first will meet the palace mistress.
Arete is her name. She springs from stock
the same as that of King Alcinous.
The tremor-maker sired Nausithous,
by Periboea, shapeliest of women,
youngest daughter of brave Eurymedon,
who once was king of wild, unruly Giants
until the Giants died out, including him.
Poseidon slept with her, begat a child,
Nausithous, who came to rule Phaeacians.
He sired Alcinous, also Rhexenor.
Apollo’s arrows killed the young Rhexenor,
just wed. He left behind a single child,
Arete, whom Alcinous made his wife
and honored her as no one else is honored
among the women keeping house for men.
The lady merits and receives respect
from children, from Alcinous himself,
from citizens who view her as divine
and greet her warmly when she tours the town.
She does not lack intelligence or virtue.
She cares about the people, settles quarrels.
If you should please her heart, she warms to you,
you likely will again see your loved ones,
your fatherland, your sound, still-standing halls.”
With that, bright-eyed Athena sped away
atop the restless water, far from Scheria.
She came to Marathon, then Athens’ streets,
Erechtheus’ sturdy house. Odysseus, though,
approached Alcinous’ lavish halls. His heart
beat fast before he crossed the bronze threshold,
because a radiant sun- or moon-like gleam
suffused benign Alcinous’ high-roofed palace.
Walls ran in all directions. Walls of bronze
with blue steel cornice reached the farthest corners.
Doors made of gold secured the well-built structure.
The bronze threshold was flanked by silver posts,
topped by a silver beam. The pulls were gold.
On either side were gold and silver dogs.
Hephaestus made them, using his fine art,
to serve as guards for brave Alcinous’ mansion—
immortal dogs, ageless till time’s end.
Inside, armchairs reposed against the walls—
threshold to farthest nook—on each a cushion,
a finely spun product of women’s craft.
Phaeacian chiefs would often linger there,
to eat and drink the always ample stores.
Young men, of solid gold on pedestals,
stood round, in each one’s hands a blazing torch
that shone throughout the night on banqueters.
About the halls were fifty servant women,
some operating mills and grinding grain,
while others worked the looms and wound the spindles.
Their fingers flew like windswept poplar leaves,
and drops of olive oil oozed from their cloth.
Just as Phaeacian men are highly skilled
at racing ships at sea, so are their wives
supreme at looms because Athena gives
the skills and understanding for fine work.
An orchard lies outside the courtyard gates,
a full four acres, hedged on every side.
The orchard’s trees grow tall and prosperous:
laden with pomegranates, apples, pears,
sugary figs and rows of thriving olives.
No tree among them ever lacks for fruit.
Winter as well as summer, never ceasing,
Zephyrus’ breath swells new fruits, ripens older.
Pear after pear matures, apple on apple,
bunch upon bunch of grapes, fig upon fig.
A bountiful vineyard also flourishes there.
Clusters of grapes lie spread on level ground
till sunlight cures them. Meanwhile some men harvest,
and others tread for juice. Unripened grapes
are shedding petals, some are turning purple.
Beyond the rows of vines, a garden patch
grows brightly colored blooms of various sorts.
The orchard holds two springs. One waters plants,
the other flows beneath the courtyard threshold,
toward the halls, where people draw their water.
These riches were Alcinous’ gifts from heaven.
Much-tried Odysseus stood awhile and gazed,
until convinced these wonders were no dream.
He crossed the threshold, stepped inside the house.
Within he found Phaeacian chiefs and leaders
with cups from which they poured to sharp-eyed Hermes—
libating as the time for sleep approached.
Divine Odysseus, though, passed through the halls,
still wrapped in night and mist Athena poured,
until he reached Arete, by Alcinous.
He threw his arms around Arete’s knees
just as the heaven-given mist dissolved.
The men throughout the halls observed and hushed,
staring amazed until Odysseus prayed:
“Arete, most esteemed Rhexenor’s daughter,
from long ordeals I reach your knees, and his.
May heaven grant these feasters happiness—
young children to bring up while yet they live,
riches and honors to leave behind when dead.
Grant me an escort! Help me reach my home,
for I have suffered long away from loved ones.”
That said, he sat in ashes on the hearth
beside the fire, and every man was silent,
until at last hero Echeneus spoke.
Of live Phaeacians he was earliest born
and so had gained much wisdom over time.
He rose among the group of men and said:
“Alcinous, it is not right for you
to let a stranger sit amid the ashes.
Our men are waiting till they hear your word,
so give the guest a silver-studded chair,
that he may rise and sit; command your aides
to mix a bowl of wine—so we may toast
the lightning-thrower Zeus, who loves a suppliant—
and have your housemaid serve our guest a dinner.”
When mighty, blest Alcinous heard that,
he reached and took adept Odysseus’ hand,
lifted him off the hearth, gave him the chair
that manly young Laodamas gave up,
his favorite son who sat close by his side.
A handmaid straightway held a water pitcher—
elegant gold—above a silver basin
to wash Odysseus’ hands, then set a table.
The head housekeeper fetched and offered bread
and proudly set out various savory foods.
Long-suffering Odysseus ate and drank.
Meanwhile Alcinous addressed his herald:
“Pontonous, mix a bowl of wine to pass
around the hall so we may pour libation
to Zeus, who always stands by supplicants.”
Pontonous mixed mirth-inducing wine,
dispensed a drop or two in every cup.
After they poured those out, they drank their fill,
until Alcinous spoke among the men:
“Phaeacian chiefs and leaders! Hear me out
while I speak what the heart within commands!
Our banquet done, go home and take your rest.
Soon after dawn, let elders gather here
to show the guest our hospitality
and sacrifice to gods. We will discuss
how we shall take him—free of toil or trials
in our safekeeping—to his fatherland,
a happy soul, however far it is.
If we do not, he might encounter ills
before he reaches there. Once he arrives,
his fate will be that which the dreaded Spinsters
spun him at birth, the day his mother bore him.
But if he is a god come down from heaven,
the deities are trying something new.
The gods always came undisguised before,
when we would sacrifice rich hecatombs.
They deigned to sit with us and feast together.
If one of us alone encountered gods,
they would not hide since we are kin to them,
as are the clans of Giants and dread Cyclops.”
Answering him, astute Odysseus said:
“Let something else be your concern, Alcinous.
Unlike the immortal gods who hold wide heaven,
my size and shape are those of mortal men.
Whichever men you know who suffered most,
the trials I faced would surely rival theirs,
and I could better them with tales of woes,
so much have gods ordained that I endure.
But let me eat, downtrodden though I am.
A needy belly knows no shame or scruple,
but forces one to answer its demands.
However weary one may be, or sad
as I am now, my body yet persists
in bidding me to eat and drink, and dims
my mind till appetites are satisfied.
But will you stir yourselves at dawn’s first glow
and set unhappy me on my homeland?
May life depart me after I have seen
my high-roofed halls, my goods, my faithful servants.”
The men heard how he spoke, and they agreed
to escort him, their guest whose words were apt.
They made libation, drank until content
and went toward their homes, prepared to sleep.
Godlike Odysseus, though, stayed where he sat,
as did Arete and Alcinous.
Their housemaids cleared away the feast’s remains,
then milky-armed Arete spoke out first,
because she recognized the cloak and tunic,
which she herself had made with handmaids’ help.
She asked the man before her pointed questions:
“Guest, I will be first to ask for answers.
What race are you? Who gave those clothes to you?
Did you not claim you wandered here by sea?”
Answering her, astute Odysseus said:
“Lady, it would be difficult to tell
my trials because the gods gave me so many,
but I will tell you what you asked about.
There is an isle, Ogygia, far from here,
where Atlas’ daughter, devious Calypso,
a fearsome goddess, dwells alone, without
companionship of mortal man or god
except for luckless me, who reached her hearth
after a silver thunderbolt from Zeus
had split my ship in half on raging seas.
My worthy sailors perished to a man,
but I embraced my vessel’s keel, hung on,
and floated nine long days, till on the tenth
gods steered me to Ogygia, where Calypso—
the fair-haired goddess—dwelt. She took me in,
she loved me, nurtured me, and even pledged
to spare me death and age forevermore,
but nonetheless she never won my heart.
I stayed for seven years, and every day
the immortal garb she gave me dripped with tears.
But as an eighth year came, began its course,
she told me it was time for me to go,
this change of mind perhaps on Zeus’s orders.
She set me on a raft of logs, well stocked
with honeyed wine, foodstuffs, immortal raiment.
She sent me pleasing breezes, gentle, warm.
Seventeen days I sailed, spanning the deep,
till on the eighteenth day a peak appeared—
your land—and I rejoiced at what I saw,
but wrongly so, for I was facing trials
that earth-shaking Poseidon would impose.
He roused a wind that drove me off my course
and whipped the seas, but he forbade the surge
that roared against my raft to bear it forward.
Soon raging whirlwinds smashed the raft, but I
continued, swimming until close to land—
this land, here wind and water carried me.
If I had gone toward the shore, the waves
would have propelled me onto monstrous rocks,
so I withdrew around the isle and found
a river’s mouth, which seemed an ideal place,
empty of rocks, protected from strong wind.
There I collapsed and rested until night
approached. I left the Zeus-poured river then
and hid in shrubbery, whose fallen leaves
I scooped to form a bed where gods spilled sleep.
Atop that leafy bed, with troubled heart
I slept the night till dawn and on past noon.
But when the sun was falling, sleep released me.
I heard your daughter’s handmaids on the strand,
playing, with her among them like a goddess.
I prayed to her, and she was thoughtful, kind,
unlike what one expects from younger folk
since youths are mostly inconsiderate.
She gave me plenteous food, a sparkling wine,
allowed me bath and oil, gave me these clothes.
Though sorely vexed, I have told you the truth.”
In turn, Alcinous replied to him:
“Guest, that was not appropriate of her.
My daughter should have led you here herself
as soon as you approached her and entreated.”
Answering him, adroit Odysseus said:
“Do not rebuke the fine young lady, sir!
Indeed, she bade me follow her forthwith,
but I refused because I was concerned
that you might take offense on seeing us.
The clans of men on earth are quick to anger.”
Alcinous’ steady voice replied to him:
“No, guest, the heart that beats in me resists
incautious wrath. Forbearance I prefer.
I wish—by Zeus, Athena and Apollo—
that you, a man of like mind to my own,
would take my daughter, be my son-in-law,
stay here and let me give you home and wealth!
But none shall keep you here against your will,
for such restraint would run afoul of Zeus.
So you may be assured, I set your trip
for morning next. You will be fast asleep
while oarsmen ply the sea till you have reached
your fatherland and halls, if you so wish.
No matter if it be far, like Euboea,
the farthest place there is, say those who saw it
the day they voyaged with fiery Rhadamanthus,
carrying him to visit Earth’s son Tityus.
They rowed him there and, with but little effort,
they made the journey back the self-same day.
Now you yourself will see the prowess of
my ships, my men who churn the sea with oars.”
When resolute Odysseus heard those words,
he spoke a silent prayer within himself:
“O father Zeus, do let this come to pass,
and let Alcinous, throughout the earth,
have lasting fame when I have reached my home!”
The pair of men continued to converse,
but milky-armed Arete told her maids
to place a bedstead in the portico,
prepare the bed with sheets and coverlets,
a counterpane, and blankets made of wool.
The handmaids left the hall with torches high,
and when they finished making up the bed,
they stood beside Odysseus, spoke to him:
“Guest, now you may go sleep! Your bed is made!”
Odysseus heard and welcomed thoughts of rest,
so often-tried Odysseus fell asleep
atop the bed set in the portico.
Alcinous slept in private palace quarters;
close by him on the linens lay his wife.


Book 8

When early-rising Dawn spread crimson fingers,
sacred Alcinous roused himself from bed,
as did Zeus-sprung Odysseus, scourge of Troy.
Revered Alcinous then led the way
to where Phaeacians held shipside assemblies.
Once there, the two men sat on polished stones,
set side by side. Athena roamed the town,
disguised as valiant, bold Alcinous’ herald,
part of her plan to steer Odysseus home.
She stood by every man she found and spoke:
“Phaeacian chiefs and leaders! Come let us
meet in assembly, hear about the stranger
who just arrived at wise Alcinous’ halls
from years at sea. His looks are like a god’s!”
Her words aroused each listener’s mind and spirit.
The meeting place’s seats soon filled with men,
and as they gathered there, transfixed, they eyed
Laertes’ fiery son, on whom Athena
showered a grace that touched his head and shoulders,
that made him seem more powerful and tall,
so that Phaeacian men would welcome him,
respect him, think he might perform the feats
by which Phaeacians likely would judge him.
After the men had reached the meeting place,
Alcinous addressed the assembly, saying:
“Phaeacian chiefs and leaders! Lend an ear
that I may say the things my heart commands!
This unknown stranger reached my halls. He roamed
from people either east or west of us.
He begs that we assure him escort home,
and we should transport him in our tradition,
for never has a man who reached my house
remained there overlong for lack of escort.
So let us drag to sea a pitch-black ship,
her maiden voyage; let fifty-two young men
be picked, men who have proven rowing skills.
Let those selected men lash oars to tholes,
then let them disembark and share a feast
within my house, a feast that I will furnish.
I so command the youths, but those of you
who hold a monarch’s scepter, follow me
so we may host our guest in my great hall.
Let none refuse! And bring the blessed minstrel,
Demodocus, to whom a god gave song,
a joy each time his soul moves him to sing.”
That said, he led the way, and with him came
the sceptered kings. A herald fetched the bard.
The fifty-two selected youths—the oarsmen—
walked to the shore as ordered by their king,
and when they came upon the seaside ship,
they dragged her hull to water deep enough;
they placed aboard her decks a mast, a sail,
and fastened oars to every thole with straps,
stout thongs. They hoisted sail, a brilliant white,
then moored the ship offshore. When that was done,
they headed toward Alcinous’ stately palace.
Men filled the halls, the portico, the courtyard—
a multitude of young and old alike.
Alcinous sacrificed a dozen goats,
eight white-tusked boars, a pair of swaying oxen.
Men flayed the beasts and made a marvelous banquet.
A herald came and led the honored minstrel,
ward of a Muse who gave both boon and curse:
she granted song, but took away his sight.
Herald Pontonous placed a chair for him
against a column midst the banqueters.
The minstrel’s clear-toned instrument he hung
above, then led the singer’s hand to touch it.
He set beside the bard a tray of food,
with wine to drink if he should so desire.
The diners’ fingers took the waiting treats,
and when desire for food and drink was quenched,
the Muse inspired the bard to sing of men
whose fame was great enough to reach the skies:
Odysseus and Achilles, Peleus’ son.
He sang about a feast where those two quarreled,
exchanging taunts and barbs, but Atreus’ son
was pleased to see the two fine Greeks at odds.
Apollo said that quarrel must occur—
when Agamemnon went to Pytho’s shrine—
before the long ordeal would start to crest
for Greeks and Trojans, hewed to Zeus’s will.
Odysseus, as the famed bard sang of that,
picked up his purple cloak with powerful hands
and drew it over his head to hide his face,
ashamed to let Phaeacians see his tears.
Each time the godlike minstrel paused his song,
Odysseus dried his tears, let down his cloak,
raised a two-handled cup and poured libation.
But when the bard began to sing anew—
his words delighting rapt Phaeacian nobles—
Odysseus hid his head again and groaned.
His falling tears escaped Phaeacians’ notice,
except Alcinous, who marked his weeping
and heard him groan from where he sat close by.
He straightway told the rowing-fond Phaeacians:
“Give ear to me, Phaeacian chiefs and leaders!
By now we have our fill of food and drink,
also the lyre, which complements our feast,
so let us go and test ourselves at sports
in order that our guest may tell his friends,
when he gets home, how plainly we excel
at boxing, wrestling, jumping and foot-racing.”
That said, he led the way, his men behind.
The herald hung the lyre up on its peg.
He took Demodocus’ hand and led the bard
outside the hall to follow, on the road,
Phaeacian leaders, eager for the games.
In time the leaders reached their meeting place,
where stood the finest youths Phaeacians had:
Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus,
Eretmeus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus,
Anabesineos, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoön,
Amphialus, son of Tekton’s son Polyneus.
Euryalus rose—a son of Naubolus
and Ares’ peer. His face and build stood out
from all Phaeacians save Laodamas.
Alcinous’ three sons were waiting there:
Laodamas, Halius, Clytoneus.
The first event was competition running.
The racers left the starting line as one
and quickly flew the plain, arousing dust.
Clytoneus, though, was easily the fastest.
As far as mules can plow in fallow land,
so far was he ahead at race’s end.
The next contest brought brutal wrestling matches,
in which Euryalus beat all contestants.
Amphialus could make the longest jump;
Elatreus was the champion discus thrower;
Laodamas, Alcinous’ son, won boxing.
After the games had entertained the crowd,
Alcinous’ son Laodamas addressed them:
“Friends, let us ask our guest if there are sports
that he knows well. His body is not slight—
his calves, his thighs, his massive arms above,
his sturdy neck betoken strength. His youth
he has retained despite his countless trials.
I say there is no force worse than the sea
at breaking men, be they however strong.”
Euryalus agreed and told his brother:
“Laodamas, your words are on the mark,
and you yourself should ask him to compete.”
After Alcinous’ worthy son heard that,
he stood among the gathered men and said:
“Our elder guest! You too should try our games,
if you know how. You look as if you would.
A mortal man’s renown is never more
than what he can achieve with legs and arms.
So come, forget your cares and test yourself!
Your trip’s remainder will be short; by now
our oarsmen have prepared a ship to sail!”
In answer, capable Odysseus said:
“Why do you challenge me, Laodamas?
Grief occupies my mind far more than games
because I have endured so many trials.
Now here in this assembly, craving home,
I beg your kings and folk: just let me watch.”
Euryalus spoke out, reproached the guest:
“You, guest, are nothing like a man with skill
at sports, the many games men have devised.
No, you are like a cautious ship’s commander,
a chief of seamen who are merely traders,
a man whose mind is only on his cargo,
shrewdly amassed. You do not look athletic.”
Odysseus answered, narrowing his eyes:
“You speak unkindly, host; your words are rash.
The gods do not grant everyone their favors,
neither in body, mind, nor gift of speech.
A man may have the least appealing build,
yet gods may crown his form with words, and men
delight to see him—never a word misplaced,
but never proud. In meetings he stands out,
and men regard him like a god in town.
Another man may look more like a god
but lacks the first man’s gift of eloquence,
and has no special gift except his build.
The gods gave nothing else: his mind is blank.
You have aroused the soul inside my chest
with inapt words. I am not lacking skill,
as you just claimed. I was among the champions
while I could lay my trust in youthful hands.
Ills slow me now, so much have I endured
in wars of men and passage through the waves,
but nonetheless I will compete with you.
Your reckless words still sting, stir me to act.”
His cloak still on, he rose and grasped a discus—
a thick stone, massive, heavier by far
than those Phaeacians threw among themselves.
He whirled and loosed it from his sturdy grip.
The discus sang; spectators ducked toward earth—
those far-famed sailors, long-oared sea-traversers.
The stone sailed past the reach of every throw.
Athena placed a marker where it fell.
She feigned a mortal’s form, and spoke a word:
“A blind man, guest, could recognize your mark
by feel since it stands not among the rest
but far beyond. Take heart for competition!
Not one Phaeacian man will equal you!”
Divine, unshakable Odysseus smiled,
delighted to behold a kindly comrade,
and he addressed the massed Phaeacian men:
“Match that, young lads! Soon I will throw again,
and this time I will fly it farther still!
With any one of you my heart bids me
compete since you have greatly roused its anger.
Let it be boxing, wrestling or foot-racing,
with any man except Laodamas.
He is my host, and who would vie with friends?
Foolish and disrespected would be he
who offered rivalry against his host
on foreign soil and cut his welcome short.
But I will not refuse another man;
I want to see you test me face to face.
In competition I am far from weak.
I know well how to use the polished bow.
I was the first to shoot a foe in fights
with hostile warriors, though a host of men
were standing by, each one prepared to shoot.
Philoctetes alone could match my skill
when we Achaeans drew our bows at Troy.
Apart from him, I claim to far surpass
the men who walk the grain-rich earth today,
but I would not compete with men of old—
Heracles or Oechalian king Eurytus—
whose archery skill matched that of deathless gods.
Eurytus died, but not because old age
found him at home. Apollo grew incensed
and killed him when his archery matched the god’s.
My spear-casts sail beyond most bowmen’s arrows.
True, one of you may pass me when we race,
as I have been relentlessly worn down
by countless storms, forestalling exercise
for days and weeks until my limbs grew soft.”
After he spoke, the men sat silently
until Alcinous offered this response:
“Guest, you have spoken not ungracious words,
and merely want to show us you have skills,
resentful that a man who watched our games
derided you, as no one should have done,
especially one who well knows proper speech.
But pay attention now so you can tell
the warriors gathered in your halls—when they
shall feast beside your wife, your young and you—
how you recall the unique excellence
that Zeus passed down to us through worthy forebears.
Though flawless boxers we are not, nor wrestlers,
our feet are fast; at sea we are unmatched;
we always love a feast, a lyre, a dance,
a heated bath, a change of clothes, and bed.
So now, you best Phaeacian dancers, come!
Make merry, so our guest can tell his folk
when he gets home how no men rival us
at sea, at running fast, at dance and song!
Let someone go retrieve Demodocus’ lyre,
which hangs in my great hall, and bring it here!”
So spoke Alcinous. A herald rose
to fetch the lyre within the monarch’s palace,
and up stood nine appointed judges, picked
because of long experience with sport.
They made a broad arena, smoothed the ground.
The herald soon arrived, the lyre in hand.
Demodocus took the lyre among young men
who gathered round the bard, masters of dance,
their feet resounding on the earth. Odysseus
stared with amazement at their flashing feet.
The minstrel plucked the lyre and sang a song
of Ares’ tryst with gold-crowned Aphrodite.
Hephaestus’ halls were where Ares first wooed,
with lavish secret gifts, then shamed the sheets
of lord Hephaestus. Word soon came to him
from Helios, who had seen them making love.
Hephaestus heard the news, which pained his heart,
and soon was in his shop, bent on redress.
His heavy anvil set, he hammered bonds,
a net impossible to stretch or break.
Incensed at Ares, he produced the mesh
and took it to the room where stood his bed.
He draped the snare, wrapped it round the bedposts
and hung it from the ceiling beam above—
transparent as a spider’s web, unseen
by even gods so finely was it wrought.
After he strung his net above the sheets,
he moved toward Lemnos’ well-built citadel,
his most admired, his favorite place on earth.
But watchful Ares did not fail to see
the famous smith Hephaestus taking leave.
He hastened forth and reached the craftsman’s halls,
inflamed with lust for gold-crowned Aphrodite,
who had just left her powerful father’s side,
come in her home, when Ares joined her there.
He took her hand in his and said to her:
“Come with me, love, and share the joys of bed.
Hephaestus is away; he has by now
arrived in Lemnos where the Sintians dwell.”
Ares’ advance was welcome to the goddess.
The moment they lay down in bed, the bonds
that deft Hephaestus forged enveloped them
till they could neither rise nor move their limbs,
and soon gave up all efforts to escape.
The far-famed, strong-armed smith in time returned,
reversing course before he came to Lemnos.
Helios had kept watch and brought him word.
He headed toward his home with heavy heart
and stopped inside the vestibule, enraged.
Ear-splitting was his shout that reached the heavens:
“O father Zeus, you blessed deathless gods!
Come view a scene both foul and laughable,
as Zeus’s daughter Aphrodite scorns me—
lame as I am—while making love with Ares.
Ares is handsome, with strong legs, while mine
were lame at birth, for which I fault no one
except my parents, who should not have spawned me.
Look at the two of them, their hot embrace!
They shamed my bed, a sight that torments me!
But they will not desire to lie there long,
however much in love. They will not want
romance because my snare will keep them bound
until her sire returns the bridal gifts
I gave on her account, the shameless whore—
a gorgeous daughter lacking constancy.”
Immortal gods convened outside his halls.
Earth-grasping Poseidon came, the helper,
Hermes, along with wide-ranging Apollo,
but every goddess stayed away, ashamed.
The male immortals thronged the vestibule,
and peals of laughter rose from blessed gods
as they observed Hephaestus’ cunning craft.
While they looked on, one might apprise another:
“Vice does not pay. The slow may best the swift,
as lame Hephaestus has encumbered now
the swiftest god of those who hold Olympus.
By means of skill he outmaneuvers Ares.”
So some might say as they exchanged their thoughts,
but lord Apollo, Zeus’s son, asked Hermes:
“Fast-traveling Hermes, generous son of Zeus,
would you not gladly suffer bonds like those
if you could sleep with golden Aphrodite.”
She Argus-slaying messenger replied:
“If only that could be, far-flung Apollo.
Though tied with thrice as many sturdy bonds,
with every god and goddess looking on,
still I would sleep with golden Aphrodite.”
Shortles broke out among the deathless gods,
except Poseidon, who maintained demands
that skilled Hephaestus loosen Ares’ ties.
Forthright Poseidon put it to Hephaestus:
“Free him, and I will guarantee that he
will pay whatever price the gods prescribe.”
The far-famed, strong-armed god declared to him:
“Earth-grasping Poseidon, do not ask that.
Your pledge to aid this cad has little worth.
By what means could I hold you to account
should he escape his bonds and spurn the debt?”
Said earth-shaker Poseidon in response:
“If Ares should renounce his debt, Hephaestus,
after you let him go, well, I will pay it.”
She strong-armed smith reluctantly replied:
“For me to turn you down would be unseemly.”
Mighty Hephaestus then released the bonds,
inviolable though they were. The lovers rose,
and Ares sped away to Thracian folk.
Mirth-loving Aphrodite fled to Cyprus:
her private close and fragrant shrine near Paphos,
where Graces rubbed her skin with olive oil,
divine, the kind immortal gods possess,
then draped her form in wondrous stunning clothes.
That was the famous minstrel’s song. Odysseus
listened entranced, as did the others there:
long-oared Phaeacians, legendary sailors.
Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius
to dance—the pair alone—as they had no peers.
One dancer took in hand a beautiful ball—
a purple sphere that Polybus once made—
and cast it toward the shadowy clouds above,
his spine bowed back. The other leapt up high
and caught the ball before his feet touched down.
After they gamboled, keeping the ball aloft,
they danced with feet that barely brushed the earth,
tossed the ball back and forth as youths beat time,
standing within the crowd, till cheers arose.
Odysseus watched and told Alcinous:
“Renowned, preeminent Alcinous,
you boasted that your dancers are the best,
and so they are. I was amazed to watch.”
Revered Alcinous smiled to hear those words,
and he straightway addressed his oar-fond men:
“Hear this from me, Phaeacian chiefs and leaders!
The stranger seems to be a prudent fellow,
so treat him as befits an honored guest.
Among our people are a dozen kings,
distinguished chiefs. With me there are thirteen.
Let each one fetch a spotless cloak and tunic,
combine them with a talent’s weight of gold.
Together let us hand the gifts to him
so that our guest will come to dinner pleased.
Euryalus should make amends with speech,
as well as gifts, for his offensive words.”
The leaders liked the plan Alcinous voiced,
and each dispatched a herald for the gifts.
Meantime Euryalus voiced this reply:
“Mighty, preeminent Alcinous,
I will appease the guest as you have asked.
More, I will give a bronze-blade sword whose hilt
is silver, with a new-sawn ivory sheath
to case the blade—a gift that he will prize.”
He gave their guest the silver-studded sword,
and as he did, he spoke appeasingly:
“Enjoy this, elder guest, and if my words
offended you, may winds now bear them off.
May gods grant you to see your land and wife
since you have suffered long away from home.”
In answer, capable Odysseus spoke:
“Ah friend! May gods bestow great gifts on you
lest later on you wish you had this blade
that you have given me with friendly words.”
That said, he slung the sword across a shoulder.
The sun soon set, the dazzling gifts arrived
with worthy heralds at Alcinous’ halls.
His manly sons accepted each king’s bounty
and placed the gifts before their honored mother.
Mighty Alcinous assumed command
from where he sat high on his august throne.
The powerful monarch told his wife, Arete:
“Come hither, wife! Bring out our finest chest,
in which to pack a laundered cloak and tunic.
Heat water over fire, a kettle full,
so that our guest may bathe when he has seen
the gifts Phaeacian chiefs brought here for him.
He will enjoy our feast, our minstrel’s song.
I will present the guest my finest flagon,
pure gold, so he will always think of me
whenever in his halls he libates gods.”
At his command, Arete told her maids
to stand a tripod at the fire forthwith.
Over the coals they set a spouted kettle,
dipped water in and kindled logs beneath.
Flames rose around the pot, the water warmed.
Meanwhile Arete brought an inlaid chest
from private rooms. She laid the gifts inside—
the clothes and gold Phaeacian lords had given—
and lastly packed a lovely cloak and tunic.
That done, she gave their favored guest advice:
“See to the lid yourself and tie it fast,
lest on your voyage someone steal these gifts
while balmy sleep prevails aboard the vessel.”
Odysseus listened well, and when he heard,
he closed the lid, then tied it with a knot,
a complex knot he learned from honored Circe.
The ranking handmaid asked the guest to bathe,
step in the tub, where he was glad to feel
the steamy bath and care that he had lacked
since he departed fair Calypso’s house,
where he was always treated like a god.
The women bathed him, rubbed his skin with oil
and clothed him in a stately cloak and tunic.
He walked to where the men were drinking wine.
Nausicaa—with heaven-given charms—
stood by a sturdy roof-supporting pillar
and gazed upon Odysseus, wonderstruck.
She found her voice and spoke a word to him:
“Gods speed you, guest, but when you reach your land,
remember me to whom you owe your life.”
In answer, eloquent Odysseus said:
“Nausicaa, august Alcinous’ child,
if Hera’s thunderous husband Zeus should grant
that I return and see my home again,
there I shall pray to you as to a goddess
until I die because you saved my life.”
With that, he took a seat beside Alcinous,
where men were mixing wine and serving food.
A herald ushered in the faithful minstrel,
revered Demodocus, and seated him
amid the feasters, leaning on a column.
Considerate Odysseus told the herald,
while cutting off a piece of choicest chine,
part of a white-tusked hog, encased in fat:
“Here, herald, offer this fine meat to one
whom I—though sad—admire, Demodocus.
Among the kinds of men on earth, the singers
merit respect and praise because the Muse
has taught them songs and loves the race of bards.”
The herald took the meat and passed it to
Demodocus, and he accepted gladly.
The feasters reached for tasty foods at hand,
and when desire for food and drink was gone,
adroit Odysseus told Demodocus:
“I laud you, bard! No mortal equals you,
you whom the Muse—if not Apollo—prompts!
You sing correctly of the Argives’ lot—
their feats, how hard they toiled, how much they bled—
as if you watched, or heard from one who did.
But come now, let your song portray the horse
Athena helped Epeus make of wood,
the horse Odysseus steered to Ilium’s heights,
packed full of warriors bent on Troy’s demise.
If you correctly sing that tale to me,
I will declare to every mortal man
that heaven granted you its gift of song!”
The minstrel felt inspired and sang the tale,
beginning when Greeks climbed aboard their ships
and sailed from Troy, leaving their camps ablaze.
Meanwhile the best Greeks huddled silently,
concealed inside the horse while Trojans massed.
To Ilium’s heights the Trojans dragged the horse,
where they engaged in unresolved debate
about the wooden beast. There were three plans:
impale the hollow horse with ruthless bronze,
or cast the creature down upon the rocks,
or let it stand and be a gift to heaven.
The latter choice was sure to be approved,
since ruin was Ilium’s fate once it contained
the wooden horse in which sat scores of brave
Achaeans, confident of death for Trojans.
He sang of how the Greeks laid Ilium waste
when pouring from their hollow ambuscade.
He sang of how one, then another, fought;
of how Odysseus—mighty as is Ares—
assailed Deïphobus’ house with Menelaus
and dared to fight the worst of battles there,
a battle that Athena helped him win.
So sang the honored minstrel while the guest
let go restraint and tears bedewed his cheeks.
As when a woman weeps upon her husband—
fallen before their city and its people,
defending helpless folk against attack,
she hears him gasp for breath and sees him die—
releasing sobs and cries of grief, while foes
use spears to beat her on her back and shoulders,
then lead her off to slavery and toil—
unmitigated sorrow mars her cheeks,
so did Odysseus’ eyes shed mournful tears.
The audience did not notice that he wept,
except Alcinous, who saw tears fall,
seated beside Odysseus, heard his groans,
and forthwith told his oar-devoted chiefs:
“Listen to me, Phaeacian chiefs and leaders!
Demodocus, subdue your clear-toned lyre!
Your song does not please everyone who listens.
From when the song began at dinner’s end,
no moment passed without a sad lament
from this our guest whose heart great sorrow cleaves.
The singing done, let us enjoy our time
together, pleasing guest and hosts alike.
To honor him, our guest, we have prepared
both gifts of friendship and an escort home.
A suppliant guest is like an honored brother
to any man who has the slightest wits.
Now, guest, do not employ your guile to veil
the things I ask about, no, be forthright.
Tell me the name your sire and mother called you,
they and the neighboring folk about your town.
No mortal man is altogether nameless,
whether he be of base or noble blood.
The parents give each child a name at birth.
Reveal to me your land, your folk, your city,
so that our ships may know where you would go.
There are no navigators here in Scheria,
nor have we rudders such as most ships have.
Our ships themselves can plumb men’s inner minds.
They learn the towns, the fertile countryside
of mortal men. They swiftly cross the deep
concealed in mist, and never have they slight
concern about misfortune or shipwreck,
although one time I heard my father say—
Nausithous—that lord Poseidon hates
how we so freely offer men safe passage.
Someday, he said Poseidon warned, our ship
would be bound home from escort, skimming seas,
and he would smash it, then seclude our town.
So that old man told what the god may do,
or not, depending on what moves his heart.
Come tell me now—and speak the honest truth—
where were you forced off course, what have you seen,
what men, what pleasing, populated cities,
both those where men are wild and those where upright
inhabitants fear gods and welcome strangers.
Disclose the reason you grow sad, you weep
to hear the fate of Greeks at Ilium’s ruin.
The gods caused that when they spun threads of doom
so there would be a song for men not born.
Did one of your close kinsmen die at Troy,
perhaps your wife’s brave brother, or her sire,
kin best beloved besides those with your blood?
Or did you lose a comrade you knew well,
a man you loved as if he were a brother,
a man familiar with your inner thoughts.”


Book 9

In turn, Odysseus told his royal host:
“Alcinous, the most esteemed of men,
it surely pleases one to hear a singer
the likes of him, who sings as might a god.
To me there is no more delightful time
than when the people’s spirits are so high,
when banqueters throughout the halls hear song,
seated in rows near tables that are filled
with meat and bread, while youths bring bowls of wine
and pour their contents into waiting cups.
Nothing could be more satisfying to me.
You are concerned about my groans, my cares.
For me to answer you may breed more groans.
But what should I tell first, and what tell last?
The heaven-dwellers gave so many trials.
First I shall tell my name so that you all
may know, and when my trials are done, someday
you must let me host you in my abode.
I am indeed Laertes’ son, Odysseus,
whose fame for stratagems has reached the skies.
I come from Ithaca, where stands a mountain,
prominent Neriton. The isles around
lie close to one another. They include
Dulichion, Same, forested Zacynthus.
Ithaca rises low above the sea—
toward the west, the others toward the east.
The land is rocky, fit for shaping men,
and I have seen no finer land on earth.
The nymph Calypso kept me far from there,
in caves, desiring me to be her husband.
So also Circe kept me in her rooms,
Aeaea’s witch, who wanted me to wed.
But neither could persuade my heart within.
Nothing compares with one’s homeland and parents,
not even if there should be sumptuous halls
where one could live in far-off bounteous lands.
So now I will describe the tortured voyage
that Zeus ordained for me when I left Troy.
“From Troy, wind drove me to Ciconian shores.
I slaughtered Ismarus’ men and sacked the town.
I took the city’s womenfolk and treasures,
divided them so each man fairly shared.
I told them we should flee on racing feet,
but they did not obey what I commanded.
Instead they swilled strong drink and cut the throats
of sheep and curl-horned oxen by the strand.
Meantime, Ciconians summoned reinforcements,
their legion neighbors who were warlike men.
They had the skills to fight from chariot decks
as well as with their feet on earth if need be.
Many as springtime leaves or flowers they came
at dawn, and wretched fate from Zeus beset
our luckless band. We suffered heavy loss.
They took a stand beside our speedy ships,
and men cast bronze-tipped spears at one another.
While dawn remained, before the day progressed,
we held our own despite their greater numbers,
but when the sun passed on toward afternoon,
Ciconians turned the tide and slaughtered Greeks.
From each Achaean ship six strong-greaved men
were lost, although the rest eluded death.
“We sailed away at last, with hearts distressed
for slain comrades, but glad to have escaped.
The crescent ships did not get underway
until we wailed three loud laments for friends
Ciconians had cut down to die on land.
Cloud-gathering Zeus soon prodded Boreas
to raise a storm, whose murky clouds concealed
both earth and sea. Dark night plunged down from heaven.
The ships bore on headlong until their sails,
by force of wind, hung torn in thirds and quarters.
Afraid of shipwreck, oarsmen stowed the sails
and rowed a rapid pace to nearby land.
Once there, throughout two days, as many nights,
we rested, hearts worn down from trials and toil,
but when at length fair Dawn began a third day,
we raised the masts, unfurled our sun-bleached canvas,
then took our seats as wind and helmsmen steered.
I would have reached my fatherland unscathed,
but round Malea Boreas stirred the waves,
raised tides that drove me out beyond Cythera.
“From there, throughout nine days, strong winds propelled me
over the fish-filled sea until we reached
a land where men eat blooms of lotus plants.
We disembarked and dipped up welcome water,
then straightway ate a meal beside the ships,
but after we had tasted food and drink,
I sent a group of comrades out to learn
what sort of bread-consuming men lived there.
I chose two men, a herald made a third.
The party soon encountered lotus eaters.
The lotus eaters meant my men no harm
and gave their visitors lotus blooms to taste.
The men who ate the honeyed lotus flowers
abandoned thoughts of ever going home.
They only wished to stay among their hosts
and eat mind-numbing blooms—return forgotten.
I forced the tearful men aboard their ships—
I dragged them on—and tied them under benches.
That done, I bade my unaffected men
to climb aboard the rapid-sailing crafts
before another ate the lethean blossom.
The men complied and took their seats at tholes;
once they were seated, oar blades thrashed the sea.
“We steered away from there with troubled hearts.
The land of lawless Cyclops was the next
we reached. The Cyclops trust in heaven’s bounty,
rather than use their hands to plow or plant.
Without a plow or seed, the land brings forth
their wheat, their barley, vineyard grapes that make
abundant wine when Zeus’s showers fall.
They have no council meetings, make no laws.
Instead they live on separate mountain peaks
in roomy caves where each prescribes his rules
for wives and children, unconcerned with peers.
“There is a fertile isle outside the bay,
not far from Cyclops’ land, but not too close,
a wooded island where live countless goats—
untamed, because men’s feet do not tread there.
Not even in the woods do hunters stalk,
the men who labor, scouring peaks for game.
The island holds no pastures, no tilled fields.
It bears no husbandry of any kind,
unpopulated save for bleating goats.
There are no red-prowed ships among the Cyclops,
nor any men who have the skills to build
such crafts as might complete a lengthy voyage
and reach the towns of mortals, in the way
of men who cross the sea to foreign folk.
Such men could make the isle a well-tilled land.
It has no faults and would bear year-round produce.
Beside the hoary sea lies low flat ground,
tenderly watered, good for long-lived vines.
The level plowland would produce tall corn
by harvest time, so fertile is the soil.
There is a bay where ropes are not required
to tie the stern or tether anchor stones,
a place where men can beach their ship and rest
till spirits rise, the winds pick up anew.
Toward the bay’s far end fresh water flows,
sprung up from caves beneath a poplar grove.
With heaven’s guiding hand, we reached that isle
through night so black, no light could penetrate.
There was a murky mist not even moonbeams,
traveling down from heaven, could break through.
Our eyes could not discern the isle we neared,
nor could we see the mighty waves that rolled
us toward the shore until the keels hit sand.
We beached the ships and dropped the flapping sails.
We disembarked, climbed down upon the shore
and went to sleep till glorious Dawn arrived.
“When Dawn displayed her earliest rosy fingers,
we took patrols around the island, curious.
The aegis-keeper’s wood-nymph daughters roused
wild mountain goats that we were keen to taste.
We grabbed the hunting spears and cambered bows
our ships contained, divided into thirds,
and launched what heaven made a fruitful hunt.
With me were twelve shiploads of men, and each
shipload took nine wild goats, but mine took ten.
Throughout the day until the sun went down,
we had a feast of ample wine and meat.
The wine aboard our ships was far from gone,
and much remained in double-handled jars
we filled when we ransacked Ciconians’ shores.
Meantime we studied Cyclops’ nearby land:
their smoke, the sounds of sheep and goats they kept.
After the sun had set and darkness came,
we fell asleep along the water’s edge.
“When early-rising Dawn again showed rose,
I called a meeting, where I told the men:
‘You steadfast comrades should wait here for now,
but I will take my ship and trusty crew
toward yonder men to learn what sort they are,
whether a savage, arrogant, lawless folk,
or else god-fearing friends to men off course.’
“I boarded ship and gave my crew commands.
They boarded, too, untied the sternward hawser
and quickly took their seats beside the tholes.
The seated seamen plied the swells with oars,
and soon we neared the land, which was not far.
On the remotest point we saw a cave,
enormous, laurel-veiled, close by where herds
of livestock—sheep and goats—lay fenced behind
tall barricades of stones set deep in earth,
sky-touching firs and leafy high-crowned oaks.
The monstrous man who kept the flocks slept there,
reclusive, never mingling with his kind.
Remote throughout his life, he knew no law.
He was a strange creation, not much like
us bread-consuming men, but like a peak
whose forests tower over nearby hills.
“Most of my trusty mariners I told
to wait beside the ship and guard her well.
A dozen seasoned comrades whom I picked
set out with me. I took a skin of wine,
sweet wine Euanthes’ son gave me—Maron,
priest of Apollo, Ismarus’ overseer.
We once protected him, his wife and child,
where they dwelt in a sacred wooded grove,
Phoebus Apollo’s. He gave me rich gifts,
including well-wrought gold, full seven talents,
a solid silver mixing bowl and, lastly,
a dozen jars that he had filled with wine
both sweet and pure—a drink sublime, of which
the servants working in his house knew not;
his trusted wife and one housekeeper knew.
Sometimes they drank the ruddy mellow vintage
from cups containing water twenty-fold,
but even so the vessels breathed sweet fragrance,
divine, which one could not resist with ease.
I brought a large goatskin of that and food,
a knapsack full. I had a sense we would
confront a monstrous man imbued with might,
a headstrong man who knew no law or justice.
“We found his grotto soon, but not the man,
as he was in his pasture tending stock.
After we entered, each man gazed wide-eyed
at laden cheese boards, overcrowded pens
of lambs and kids—carefully segregated:
spaces for spring’s first-born, for middle size,
for newly birthed. The pails nearby held whey,
as did the well-wrought bowls he used for milking.
My men entreated me to let them first
take off the ripened cheeses, then return
to empty out the pens of lambs and kids
and drive them to the ship before we sailed.
That would have turned out well, but I refused
so I could see what else our host might give.
The man, though, would not prove to please my comrades.
“We lit a fire, round which we sacrificed,
then helped ourselves to cheese and waited there
till he drove in his flocks. He brought a heap
of seasoned wood to use for cooking food.
He threw the wood, it crashed down on the floor,
and we sought out the grotto’s depths, afraid.
He filled the ample cave with sleek livestock
that could be milked, but males he left outside—
his rams, his billies—penned in his vast yard.
He lifted high and set a door of stone,
a rock so heavy, no two dozen carts—
strong four-wheel carts—could roll away or budge
the weight he placed to block his cavern’s mouth.
He sat and milked his sheep, his bleating goats,
then set a newborn under each in turn.
He quickly curdled half the pure white milk
and scooped the curds into a braided basket.
He left the other half in pails that he
could set aside and drink at suppertime.
Methodically, he finished up his tasks.
After he stoked his fire, he noticed us:
‘Ah strangers! Who are you? Whence did you sail?
Do you meander on a wicked quest,
raiders perhaps, who roam the sea for spoils
and risk your lives to plunder foreigners?’
“So spoke the man, and our high spirits sank—
aghast at his unhuman booming voice—
but still I found the words to answer him:
‘We are Achaeans blown off course from Troy.
Capricious winds drove us across the deep
while heading home. Route after fruitless route
we took according to the will of Zeus.
We served with Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
more famous now than any man on earth
since he slew armies, sacked Troy’s citadel.
Now we have happened here, come to your knees
for hospitality, in hopes that you,
as host, will offer customary gifts.
Respect the gods! We are your supplicants,
and Zeus protects the supplicating guest.
He safeguards strangers, who deserve respect.’
“With pitiless heart, he spoke right back to me:
‘You are a fool, you stranger from afar,
to bid me fear or shrink from deathless gods.
We Cyclops do not care a whit for Zeus
or any god because we are more mighty.
To sidestep Zeus’s wrath, I would not spare
a man of you unless my heart so wished.
Now tell me where you left the ship you brought.
Is it nearby or on an outer shore?’
“He tested me, but I retained my wits,
so in response I fashioned guileful words:
‘The earth-shaker Poseidon smashed my ship,
forced it on offshore rocks at island’s end.
A wind from seaward drove us toward the reef,
and only I with these few men survived.’
“The ruthless-hearted man did not reply.
Instead he shot both hands toward my comrades,
seized two as if they were small pups and bashed
them on the floor, spilled dripping brains to earth.
He tore them limb from limb to make his dinner,
then like a mountain lion devoured their parts,
including flesh, entrails and marrowy bones.
We wept and held our hands aloft to Zeus,
watching these heinous deeds, but we were helpless.
After the Cyclops filled his monstrous belly,
devouring human meat, he drank fresh milk
and lay stretched out among his stock to sleep.
I contemplated in my heart and soul
whether I should approach, unsheathe my sword
and drive it through his chest to pierce his liver.
At length I chose another course, restraint,
which skirted dismal death for most of us,
for we could never reach his cavern’s mouth
by moving back the heavy stone he placed.
So we lay down and groaned, awaiting Dawn.
“Early, when Dawn first showed her rosy fingers,
he stirred his embers, milked his lustrous stock
and placed a newborn under each female.
When he had briskly done his morning chores,
again he seized two men to make his meal,
devoured the two and led his livestock out.
He moved the great door-stone to let them pass,
then moved it back as one might cap a quiver.
Whistling, he drove the beasts to mountain fields
while I remained behind, distraught, and wondered
whether Athena might grant me revenge.
Eventually there came to mind a plan.
Beside the Cyclops’ pen a cudgel lay,
green olive wood, which he had cut to use
when it had dried. To us the log looked like
the mast atop a ship with twenty tholes,
a freighter that could cross the sea’s expanse.
It looked to be both tall and stout enough.
I cut away a piece a fathom long
and dragged it where my men could make it smooth.
Smooth it they did. To make it sharp, I pared
one end and shoved it in the fire to harden.
When done, I hid the stake beneath some dung,
great heaps of which were scattered through the grotto.
I told my men to choose by shaking lots
the ones who would join me to lift the stake
and ram it in the Cyclops’ sleeping eye.
The lots chose men I would have picked myself—
those four and I then made a team of five.
At dusk he came, herding his glossy stock.
He drove the cattle straight inside the cave.
This time he did not leave the males outside,
perhaps because of heaven’s prompt, or instinct.
He raised aloft and set the weighty stone,
then sat and milked his sheep, his bleating goats,
placing a newborn under each female.
When he had briskly finished evening chores,
once more he seized two men to make his supper.
Full bowl of wine in hand, I told the Cyclops:
‘Have wine to drink while eating human flesh
and learn what luscious drink our ship once held!
I brought this wine in hopes you would be kind
and send me home, but no, you rage instead.
No man will ever travel here again
from mortals’ cities. You have done me wrong.’
“He took it, drank it down, intensely pleased—
sweet as it was—and asked me for another:
‘Give me another drink, and speak your name!
I will respond in kind. You will be glad,
for fertile land around the Cyclops grows
large-clustered grapes, which Zeus’s rains expand,
and juice from them is like ambrosial nectar.’
“I poured another bowl of sparkling wine.
Three times I poured, three times he rashly drank.
When wine had made its way around his wits,
I spoke to him with calculated words:
‘Cyclops, you asked my name, and now I will
declare it, then accept the gift you promised.
My name is No One, which is what my parents
called me at birth, and what my comrades call me.’
“With ruthless heart he answered straightaway:
‘Well, No One shall be last for me to eat,
your comrades first. That is my gift to you.’
“With that, he leaned to me and fell face up.
He lay, his thick neck bent askew, while sleep
took hold and overcame him—spewing wine
and chunks of men amid wine-scented belches.
I shoved our stake beneath deep coals, point-first,
where it could heat while I addressed my men,
inspiring them lest fear might hold some back.
I waited till the point was on the verge
of flame. Though green, it cast a frightful glow.
I drew it from the fire to where my men
stood by. A god gave them audacity.
They hoisted up the sharpened olive log
and drove it in his eye while from above
I twisted hard. As when a shipwright drills,
his helpers deftly tug the auger’s straps
from both its ends to keep the drill rotating,
so in his eye we held the red-hot spike
and spun it, causing heated blood to flow.
Heat scorched the lashes near his eye, the brows.
The eyeball burned, it hissed, it burst its roots.
As when a smith who makes a bronze axe head
will plunge it into shrilly hissing water,
tempering the piece to be as strong as iron,
so did the eyeball hiss around the brand.
Loud screams of anguish echoed off rock walls
and we shrank back, afraid. Eventually,
he drew the gory stake out of his eye—
it took both hands—and threw the piece aside.
He gave his loudest call for other Cyclops,
who dwelt in caves throughout the windswept heights.
They heard his cry and came from near and far,
stood at his cave and asked what vexed him so:
‘Why, Polyphemus, did you shout so loudly
through the ambrosial night and rob our sleep?
Could some man be about to thieve your stock
or kill you using might or trickery?’
“From in his cavern, Polyphemus said:
‘No One is killing me by might and trick.’
“His brethren answered him in swift reply:
‘So you are by yourself and no one harms you.
If Zeus is plaguing you, you have no chance
except to pray our father, lord Poseidon.’
“His clansmen went their way, and I rejoiced
at how my plan—the name—had so deceived them.
The Cyclops wailed. He groaned in agony.
He groped until he found and moved the door-stone,
then sat there in the doorway, arms stretched wide
to catch a man who might pass with his sheep.
He hoped I would be desperate enough,
but I was thinking, wondering what might work
to ward off death for me and those I led.
I pondered every sort of trick and scheme,
since gravest menace jeopardized our lives.
At length a worthy tactic came to mind.
The Cyclops’ rams were fat with woolly fleece,
not only thick but fine, and nearly black.
I tied them side by side—with willow withes
on which the lawless Cyclops slept at night—
in threes. The middle animal bore a man,
the ones on either side protected him.
Each trio bore one comrade, leaving me
by far the largest ram the flock contained.
I grasped his back and dropped beneath his belly,
where I stretched out, my hands entwined in fleece.
I held on tight and kept a steadfast heart.
So readied, we awaited brilliant Dawn.
“When she stretched forth her early coral fingers,
the Cyclops let his male stock out to graze,
and left the unmilked females penned inside
with udders full. Their lord, in searing pain,
carefully felt the back of every male,
but he was so distraught he failed to feel
beneath his woolly rams where men were tied.
The ram that carried me was last to go
while I clung tight according to my plan.
“Huge Polyphemus felt the sheep and said:
‘Beloved ram! Why do you leave the cave
behind the flock as you have never done?
You are the first to graze the flowery grass,
the first to reach the rivers’ flowing streams,
the first to stand and wait outside the fold
at dusk. You now come last. Perhaps you grieve
about my eye, lost to an evil man
who overcame my mind with too much drink.
The man, No One, will not escape my wrath.
If you could come to think like me, to speak
and tell me where he skulks to dodge my fury,
his brains would soon be spread throughout this cavern,
splashed on the ground. With that, perhaps my heart
would feel relief from pain that No One caused.’
“That said, he sent the ram outside the cave.
When we were scarcely past the fold’s doorway,
I freed myself, my men beneath the sheep.
Straightway, with frequent backward looks we drove
the fat livestock until we reached our ship,
where waiting comrades welcomed those of us
who cheated death, and mourned for those we lost.
My nod forbade each man prolonged lament,
and I commanded them to herd the beasts
aboard the ship so we could sail away.
The seamen quickly took their seats at tholes,
each in his place, and oar blades churned the sea.
After we sailed as far as most can shout,
I called a farewell taunt back toward the cavern:
‘Cyclops! It turned out we kept you from eating
more of my men inside your hollow cave,
no, ills were soon to fall on you instead!
You murdered guests within your home, your grotto,
and even ate them, so Zeus punished you!’
“The Cyclops grew incensed at my insults.
He wrested off a massive mountain’s peak
and threw it down at our retreating ship.
It hit close by and barely missed our rudder.
The catapulted missile heaved the brine
and raised a wave that bore us back toward land.
The tide propelled the ship against the shore,
but I took in my hands a lengthy pole
and shoved the craft sideways while signaling
to lower oars so that we might escape.
My sailors saw me nod and rowed ahead,
rowed twice the distance of our first attempt.
Again I mocked the Cyclops, though my men,
one then another, begged me to desist:
‘Why would you want to taunt that savage man
who just now hurled a rock that drove our ship
right back to land where we thought death awaited?
Had he heard your voice taunting, mocking him,
he might have smashed our heads, our vessel’s timbers,
casting a boulder like the one that missed.’
“Their words did not deter my valiant spirit,
furious as I was, so I cried out:
‘Cyclops! In case a mortal man someday
should ask about your ugly useless eye,
Odysseus blinded you, the city-sacker,
Laertes’ son, whose home is Ithaca!’
“Answering that, the Cyclops moaned and said:
‘Ah me, the augury once told was true!
There was a noble, skillful prophet here,
our best, Telemus, son of Eurymus,
a prophet to us Cyclops till he aged.
He told me that upon some future day
Odysseus’ hands would take away my sight.
I long expected that a mighty man
would come, a man exuding strength and valor.
But no, a wretched man, a feeble dwarf
has conquered me with drink and struck me blind!
Still, come, Odysseus, I will hand you gifts
and ask Poseidon to escort you hence.
I am his son. He boasts to be my sire,
and he could heal me, he alone among
earth’s mortal men, and gods who live at ease.’
“So he proposed, and I replied to him:
‘If only I had power, I would take
your life and send you off to Hades’ halls
where lord Poseidon could not heal your eye.’
“After this jibe he prayed to lord Poseidon,
stretching his arms up toward the starry sky:
‘Hear me, dark-haired Poseidon, shaker of earth!
If it is true that you once fathered me,
keep from his hearth this violent man, Odysseus,
Laertes’ son whose home is Ithaca,
but if it is his fate to see loved ones—
to reach his fatherland, his sturdy house—
let him arrive aboard a stranger’s ship—
his comrades lost—and find unrest at home.’
That was his prayer; the dark-haired god heard well.
“The Cyclops took an even bigger rock.
He whirled to vest his throw with massive force
and cast the rock behind our dark-prowed craft.
It fell so close, it splashed the rudder’s blade.
The falling missile plunged, the water surged,
a wave propelled us forward toward a beach,
the very island where we left our comrades.
Their group of idle ships was there. The crews
sat desolate and wept, awaiting us.
We beached our ship atop the sandy shore,
and crewmen disembarked beside the surf.
We drove the Cyclops’ livestock off the ship,
and I divided them among the men.
My strong-greaved comrades gave a ram to me,
by far the finest beast, which on the strand
I sacrificed to Zeus, the highest lord.
I burned its thighs, but Zeus ignored the gift.
His one concern was how to devastate
my oar-fit ships and every worthy sailor.
While that day lasted, till the sun went down,
we dined on copious meat and drank sweet wine.
When Helios sank and darkness cloaked the isle,
our eyelids closed beside the water’s edge.
“As soon as Dawn displayed her pale red fingers,
I waked my sleeping men and ordered them
to board their vessels, cast the hawsers off.
The boarded seamen took their seats at tholes,
each man in place, and thrashed the sea with oars.
“Despite our heavy hearts we sailed ahead,
relieved to be alive, unlike lost friends.”


Book 10

“We reached the isle Aeolia, on which dwells
Hippotes’ heaven-favored son Aeolus,
and round his seagirt isle there stands a wall
of hard, impervious bronze above sheer cliffs.
Within his halls his dozen children live:
six sons, six daughters, each in youthful bloom.
He gave his sons his daughters as their wives,
and at their parents’ side they constantly
enjoy a feast with sumptuous treats at hand.
The house’s savory fragrance spills outdoors
while daylight lasts. At night the wives and men
sleep well in covers draping filigreed beds.
We came into their town, their regal halls,
where through a month he hosted me. He asked
of Troy, the Argive ships, the Greeks’ return,
and I related everything forthrightly.
When time arrived to travel on, I sought
his guidance, whereupon he planned our voyage.
A leather bag he gave me, ox’s hide,
containing whistling winds in all their courses—
for Zeus gave him control of every wind,
the power to rouse or quiet them as he wished.
Aboard my ship he sealed the bag with cord—
of silver, lest it leak the slightest breath.
He saved out Zephyrus, the westerly,
to carry home my ships, but Zephyrus
would fail when our own folly caused our ruin.
“For nine long days we sailed—the nights as well—
and on the tenth our fathers’ land appeared,
so close our eyes could make out men at watch fires,
but sleep subdued me, weary as I was,
since I had manned the sail till then—refused
my comrades’ aid—the quicker to make land.
The men now freely spoke among themselves,
said I was bringing gold and silver home,
gifts of Hippotes’ generous son Aeolus.
One man might say while glancing toward another:
‘Men love and hold this man in high esteem
no matter where he goes among their towns.
He brings away from Troy much priceless loot,
his spoils, while we who also made the voyage
come home with only empty hands to show.
Beyond the spoils, Aeolus gave this bag.
Now let us quickly see its valued contents,
just how much gold and silver this bag holds.’
“So some surmised, and their desires prevailed.
They loosed the bag, and shrieking winds sped forth.
The tempest straightway bore our ships to sea
and left our fatherland behind. As soon
as I awoke, I wondered deep inside
whether to hurdle overboard and drown
or steel my heart to stay among the living.
Resolved to stay, I hid inside my ship,
lay flat while violent windstorms carried us
right back to isle Aeolia. My men groaned.
“We went ashore, where we found drinking water,
and soon the men were eating by their ships.
After we had our fill of food and drink,
I took a herald—plus one comrade more—
inland and reached Aeolus’ regal halls,
where he was feasting with his wife and children.
When we approached the doorway posts and threshold,
we stopped until they questioned us, amazed:
‘Why are you here? Which angry god assailed you?
We sent you off expecting you would reach
your fatherland, your home, and those you love.’
“With aching heart, I spoke among them thus:
‘Unworthy comrades foiled me while I slept,
but set it right, friends, you possess the power.’
“I spoke in mellow tones, entreating them,
but they sat silent till the father barked:
‘Depart this island now, most wretched man!
It is not right for me to host or aid
a man the gods who live at ease detest.
So go! You came here hated by immortals!’
“That said, away he sent us, groaning deeply,
and on we sailed despite our heavy hearts.
My comrades’ spirits ebbed from heavy rowing—
the wind’s propulsion lost through our own fault.
We sailed for six days straight, the nights as well,
and reached the lofty citadel of Lamos,
in Laestrygonian Telepylus, where herdsmen
returning home meet others setting out.
A sleepless man can draw two wages there—
the one for herding cows, the other sheep—
so like are night and day to one another.
We came into a lovely bay, with cliffs
that soared aloft on every side, unbroken.
Its beaches jutted, facing one another,
until they reached the bay’s slim entryway.
My fellow sailors steered between the strands
inside the bay’s confines and anchored there,
a refuge where strong billows never swelled,
never disturbed the water’s shining calm.
My dusky ship I kept outside the bay,
tied fast to outcropped rock where land met sea.
I climbed until I found a lookout point
from which I saw no works of man, no herds,
but smoke there was, arising off the ground.
I sent some comrades forth to ascertain
what sort of folk might dwell upon this land.
I chose two men, a third to serve as courier.
They came upon a roadway smoothed by carts
that carried firewood in from mountain forests,
and soon they met a maiden fetching water,
Antiphates the Laestrygonian’s child.
The girl was coming from a lovely spring,
Artacia, source of water for the city.
The men addressed the girl and questioned her
concerning who the king and lord was there.
She pointed out her father’s high-roofed palace.
They walked inside the ornate halls and found
a giantess, like a mountain, terrifying.
She called Antiphates, then in assembly,
her husband, who forthwith planned my men’s doom.
Straightway he seized one, dressed him out to eat.
The other two took flight and reached the ships.
The king raised hue and cry, then up arose
the mighty Laestrygonians everywhere,
hordes like the Giants, not resembling humans.
Atop the cliffs they cast down man-sized boulders,
and all too soon I heard a dreadful din—
the sounds of vessels smashed and men impaled
like fishes, speared to make a grisly feast.
While those comrades were killed, trapped in the bay,
I drew the whetted sword beside my thigh
and slashed the ropes that moored my red-prowed ship
while shouting for my crew to steel themselves
and ply their oars to let our craft escape.
Afraid of death, the oarsmen churned the sea
and fled the towering cliffs to open water—
my ship alone survived, the rest were wrecked.
“We sailed ahead, disheartened once again
for comrades lost, but glad we outran death.
We struck the isle Aeaea, dwelling place
of goddess Circe, dread and fair of voice,
sister of malevolent Aeetes.
The light of mortals, Helios, sired the pair,
and Ocean’s daughter Perse was their mother.
We quietly sailed our vessel toward the land—
a sheltered harbor heaven found for us.
After we disembarked, two days and nights
we lay there, resting toil-depleted hearts,
but when Dawn’s glowing tresses brought a third day,
I took in hand my spear, my sharp-edged sword,
and clambered up to where the view was long
in hopes I might observe some works of man.
I took a stand atop a rugged cliff,
and there I spotted telltale smoke that rose
from Circe’s halls beyond the woods and copse.
I contemplated, probed within my heart,
whether to go explore the smoke I saw,
but after thinking, I decided no—
I would return to where we moored the ship
and let my comrades dine, then go explore.
As I approached the crescent-contoured craft
alone, a heaven-dweller pitied me
and sent across my path a massive stag
who sought his way from woodlands toward a stream
to slake a thirst the burning sun had raised.
The moment he emerged, I struck his back.
Right through his spine I drove my bronze-tipped spear.
He fell in dust, he moaned, his soul took flight.
I pressed a foot beside his wound, withdrew
the spear and let it fall aside to earth.
I garnered youthful saplings—willow withes—
and made a braided rope one fathom long
with which I quickly bound the creature’s feet.
I hung him round my neck and reached the vessel,
propped on my spear. I could not use an arm
to hold him on a shoulder, big as he was.
I dropped him near the ship, then sought to cheer
my men with optimistic words for each:
‘Ah friend, despite setbacks we shall not plunge
to Hades’ realm before our day of fate.
So come! While there is meat and drink at hand,
we ought to eat lest hunger wear us down!’
“The sailors straightway heeded what I said.
They left their hideouts near the restless sea
and gazed astounded when they saw the stag.
After their eyes had taken in their fill,
they washed their hands and made a bounteous feast.
While day remained, until the sun’s descent,
we dined on marvelous meat, drank honeyed wine.
But when the sun declined and darkness came,
we lay down waterside and went to sleep.
“As soon as Dawn displayed her rosy fingers,
I had the crew assemble, then I spoke:
‘Hear what I say, my much-enduring men!
We do not know where dawn or darkness is,
or where the sun goes underneath the ground
and rises from, but we must make the most
of what prospects we have—slim, I would say.
I climbed a craggy lookout whence I viewed
an island ringed around by boundless seas.
The land lies flat, and in its midst was smoke
that I could barely see through thick-grown woods.’
“Their hearts began to thump when they heard that,
recalling what the Laestrygonian did,
and Cyclops—fiery-tempered slaughterers.
They mourned lost friends, they wailed, and tears gushed forth,
but nothing worthwhile came of their lament.
“I formed two groups and split the strong-greaved men
between the two. Each group I gave a chief,
Eurylochus was one and I the other.
We two shook lots that we dropped in a helmet.
The lot of bold Eurylochus jumped out,
so he set forth with twenty-two comrades,
in tears, and left the rest of us behind.
They came upon a glen where Circe’s halls
arose, smooth-polished stone on well-kept grounds
where all about roamed mountain lions and wolves—
once men whom she gave potions, then bewitched.
They did not spring upon my crew; instead
they calmly stood nearby and wagged their tails.
As dogs surround their lord whose feast is done,
begging until he deigns to give them scraps,
around those men the sharp-clawed wolves and lions
wagged tails, but nonetheless the men felt fear.
They reached the fair-haired goddess’ entryway,
from where they heard her lovely voice in song.
She worked her massive loom, the sort that gods
employ to weave fantastic fine-spun cloth.
The chief, Polites, was the first to comment,
among my most admired and trusted men:
‘Inside a woman works a giant loom
and sings so beautifully the floors resound!
We should address her, deity or mortal.’
“They did as he proposed and called out loudly.
She forthwith darted through her gleaming doors
and waved them in. My comrades blindly followed,
except Eurylochus, who sensed a trap.
She seated some on couches, some on chairs.
She brought them cheeses, barley, clear pale honey
and Pramnian wine, well mixed, in which she poured
a drug to blot the men’s recall of home.
She gave the drink, and after they partook,
she raised her wand and drove them to a sty.
Each man now had a pig’s head, bristles, voice
and shape, but still their minds remained unchanged.
They wailed, they squealed, as Circe herded them
and tossed them acorns, berries, dogwood seeds
to eat—the common feed of wallowing hogs.
“Eurylochus straightway ran back to us
and told about his comrades’ wretched fate,
but he could not get out a word at first,
so deeply smitten was his heart, his eyes
so filled with tears, his spirit sunk in grief.
In time his puzzled comrades questioned him,
and he described the ruin his fellows met:
‘We went up through the woods, renowned Odysseus,
and found the glen where Circe’s palace stands—
all polished stone—on well-attended grounds.
Inside a woman worked a loom and sang—
a heavenly female voice. The men called her.
The goddess opened wide her gleaming doors,
bade us come in, and my comrades obeyed.
Not I—I sensed a trap and stayed outside.
My fellows disappeared, and not a one
returned, though I sat still and watched for hours.’
“At that, I slung across my back a bow
and heavy sword of silver-studded bronze.
I bade him lead us back the way he came,
but he took hold of both my knees and begged.
He wept as he addressed his plea to me:
‘Sir, do not take me there, no, leave me here.
I know that you will not return yourself,
nor will your men. So quickly we should all
take flight in order to escape sure doom!’
“I spoke to him, I answered his appeal:
‘Eurylochus, by all means you stay put,
take food and drink beside our hollow ship,
but weighty duty forces me to go.’
“That said, I took my leave of ship and shore.
I walked up through the hallowed glens, almost
to potion-mixing Circe’s stately palace.
Gold-sceptered Hermes suddenly appeared
as I approached, in form a youthful man
with nascent beard—a lad in finest bloom.
He took my hand in his and spoke to me:
‘Why do you come alone up through these paths
you do not know? Your men at Circe’s halls
now look like hogs and are confined in sties.
Do you intend to free them? I doubt you
ever return. No, you would languish there,
but I will help you, keep you safe from harm.
Ingest an herb before you reach the palace,
one that will turn aside your day of ruin.
But first I must describe the wiles of Circe.
She will prepare for you a poisoned drink,
but its bewitching power will fail thanks to
the potent herb I mentioned. There is more.
When Circe waves her wand and makes to strike,
unsheathe the whetted sword beside your thigh,
and spring at her as if you mean to kill.
She will be cowed, will seek to sleep with you,
and you should not refuse the goddess’ bed
if you desire for her to free your men,
but first demand that she must swear an oath—
a pledge that she will never do you harm—
else while you sleep she might emasculate you.’
“The Argus-slayer handed me an herb,
which he uprooted, showing me its structure:
its roots were black, its flower white as milk.
Gods call it moly—hard for mortal men
to dig, but gods can do such things with ease.
That done, he started off through island woods
for high Olympus, I for Circe’s halls,
my heart profoundly troubled as I walked.
I stood outside the goddess’ entryway
and called for her. The goddess heard my voice.
Straightway she sprang outside her gleaming doors
and asked me in. I followed, heart atremble.
She sat me on a throne adorned with silver,
beautifully wrought, a footstool underneath.
She mixed for me a gold cupful of drink
in which she cast a drug to weaken me.
I drank it but felt none of its effect.
She seized her wand. She pummeled me and said:
‘Off to the sty! Go wallow with your comrades!’
“I drew the whetted sword beside my thigh
and leapt at her as if I meant to kill.
She screamed, she ducked her head, she clasped my knees
and spoke again, but now her words were soft:
‘Where are you from? Where are your kin? Your town?
I am amazed the drug did not bewitch you!
No man before you has withstood its spell,
the many who allowed it past their teeth.
Your chest contains a soul immune to witchcraft.
Indeed, you must be versatile Odysseus,
the man the Argus-slayer said would come
aboard a ship when traveling back from Troy.
Here, then! Do sheathe your weapon! Let us two
go now to bed in order that the weld
of making love will create trust between us.’
“Answering her proposal, I declared:
‘How can you bid me now make love to you
who turned my men to swine in these same halls?
You seek to capture me by guileful bait,
lure me to bed with you in privacy,
where you may castrate me when I undress.
I do not choose to go to bed with you
unless you swear a solemn oath to heaven
that you will never wish me harm again.’
“When I said that, she swore as I prescribed,
and after she had pledged her solemn oath,
I straightway mounted Circe’s fetching bed.
“Her handmaids busied round their lady’s halls,
four nymphs she kept to do her palace work,
nymphs born of hallowed watery groves or springs,
or sacred rivers that cascade to sea.
One draped the chairs with sumptuous woven rugs
and spread a linen cloth beneath each chair.
The second placed beside each chair a table,
silver, and set atop a golden basket.
The third prepared a bowl of honeyed wine,
a silver bowl, and set out golden cups.
The fourth brought water, then she lit a fire
beneath a kettle. Soon the water warmed,
and when the water in the bright bronze boiled,
she bathed me, mixing water from the kettle,
blended to please—from head and shoulders down,
until she freed my limbs of weariness.
After the bath she rubbed on olive oil
and gave me clothes, a fine-spun cloak and tunic.
She led the way and sat me in a chair,
beautifully made, a footstool underneath.
She gently poured out water from a pitcher—
one made of gold—above a silver basin,
and washed my hands. She drew a table closer,
on which the head housekeeper set out bread,
and proudly served a rich array of foods.
She bade me eat, but I lacked appetite.
I sat distracted, heart foreboding ill.
“When Circe saw me sitting by the treats,
too sorrowful to eat a single bite,
she stood near where I sat and said to me:
‘Come now, Odysseus, why do you sit mute
and eat your spirit, not the food or drink?
You need not fear that I will try more tricks,
since I have sworn a solemn oath to you.’
“In answer to her query, I declared:
‘Ah Circe, how could any virtuous man
possess the heart to taste your food and wine
before you freed his men for him to see?
If you want me to eat and drink relaxed,
release before these eyes my trusty comrades!’
“The goddess heard. She strode across the hall,
picked up her wand, threw wide the pigsty gates
and drove out what resembled full-grown hogs.
They gathered round her, and among the swine
she walked, applied to each an antidote.
Their bristles vanished, bristles that had grown
when Circe gave them baneful drugs to drink.
The men who reappeared were younger now,
and taller, more agreeable to look at.
Each recognized me, squeezed my hand in his,
and all began to weep till through the halls
their wail resounded, moving even Circe.
“The radiant goddess stood near me and said:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
return to where your ship lies by the shore
and drag the vessel out upon the land.
Locate a cave to store your gear and rigging,
then come back here and bring your trusty crew.’
“My manly heart agreed with what she said,
and I set out toward my shoreside ship.
When I arrived, I found my loyal comrades
lamenting miserably and shedding tears.
As when the calves surround a herd of cows
returning to the farmyard after grazing,
and eagerly cavort outside the pens
and keep up joyous bleats to welcome back
their mothers, so at sight of me my men
shed tears and thronged, each joyful deep inside
as if he had regained his fatherland
in Ithaca, where he was born and raised.
The tearful men spoke words like these to me:
Scion of Zeus, to see you makes us glad
as if we had got home to Ithaca,
but tell us what befell our missing comrades!’
“To that, I had a reassuring answer:
‘Men, drag the vessel out upon dry land;
in yonder cave conceal its gear and rigging.
Those chores completed, come along with me
to Circe’s halls, where you will see your fellows
eating and drinking copious stores kept there.’
“My oarsmen heard and hastened to obey,
except Eurylochus, who disagreed.
He raised his voice and rattled off a speech:
‘Poor wretches, why seek out calamity
by going to Circe’s halls, where she will change us,
every one, to pigs or wolves or lions,
and order us to roam her palace grounds?
It will be like what Cyclops did, the time
Odysseus rashly led our hapless friends
to where they died through his foolhardiness.’
“What he said troubled me, and I considered
whether to draw the long sword by my thigh
and cut his head off, let it fall to earth,
close kinsman though he was, but his comrades
convinced me not to, pleading one by one:
‘Scion of Zeus, if you see fit, let him
wait here beside the ship, watch over her,
while you lead us to Circe’s sacred palace.’
“They headed inland, leaving ship and sea;
nor did Eurylochus remain behind—
he feared my stern rebuke should he do so.
“Meanwhile in Circe’s halls she bathed the men
and rubbed them head to toe with olive oil.
She gave them clothing—tunics, woolen cloaks—
and they were feasting when we came upon them.
My comrades stared and recognized each other;
they wept till moans resounded through the rooms.
The goddess stepped up close to me and said:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
lament no longer. I am well aware
of how you men have suffered while at sea
and how on land malicious foes assailed you.
But now the time has come to eat and drink
until your chests contain the hearts and souls
you had when first you left your fatherland,
steep Ithaca. Your spirits now are down.
Past trials preoccupy you, overwhelm
your onetime cheer, so much have you endured.’
“The goddess’ plea convinced our valorous hearts.
From then until a full year’s days had passed,
we dined on juicy meats, drank strong, sweet wine,
but when the year was out, its seasons gone,
its months slipped by, its long days memories,
my faithful men called me aside and said:
‘Remember once again the land we left,
in case it is ordained that you return
to native soil where stands your high-roofed house.’
“My comrades’ words convinced my manly spirit.
The rest of that day, till the sun sank low,
we sat and feasted—marvelous meats and wine—
but when the sun had set and darkness come,
the men dispersed to sleep throughout the halls,
and I climbed up on Circe’s ornate bed.
I clasped her knees, implored, and she heard well
while I related quickly my concern:
‘O Circe, keep the vow you made to me—
to send me home. My heart is keen to go.
My grumbling comrades wear my spirits down.
They grouse whenever you are not nearby.’
“Straightway the radiant goddess answered me:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
you are not held against your will. Continue.
You must, though, sail from here until you reach
the realm of dread Persephone and Hades,
where you must seek the shade of Thebes’ Tiresias,
the sightless seer whose mind is still alert.
Though he is dead, Persephone kept his mind
intact, unlike the other flitting shades.’
“When I heard that, my heart began to thump,
and I wept on her sheets. What use desire
to live and look upon the lighted sun!
but when I had my fill of wrenching sobs,
I spoke to her, addressing what she said:
‘O Circe, who will lead the way for me?
No man has sailed a ship to Hades’ realm.’
“The luminous goddess answered my concerns:
‘Laertes’ versatile offshoot Odysseus,
have no concern about a navigator.
Upright your mast, unfurl your bright white sail,
then sit and let the breath of Boreas blow.
But when the vessel passes into Ocean—
offshore where lie Persephone’s fertile groves,
her towering poplars, willows spilling fruit—
there beach your ship by Ocean’s unplumbed whorls
and go on foot to Hades’ moldy realm,
where Acheron’s streams meet Pyriphlegethon’s.
Cocytus mingles there, a branch of Styx.
A rock stands where the thundering rivers join.
Draw near to that and follow these commands.
Dig out a pit, about a cubit square.
Pour consecrated drink for all the dead:
first blended honey, afterward sweet wine,
and water third. Strew barley grains on top.
Entreat the feeble-headed dead and vow
to kill the finest ox in Ithaca
and burn it as a sacrifice for them,
but vow to slay a ram for seer Tiresias,
coal black, most prominent among your flocks.
When you have thus beseeched the hordes of shades,
slit wide a black ewe’s throat, also a ram’s,
both facing Erebus. Then turn around
and walk toward the Stygian streams, where swarm
the countless souls of mortals who have died.
Call in your trusty men and order all
to flay, then burn, the sheep whose throats you cut
with sharpened bronze. Next they should pray to gods,
to mighty Hades, dread Persephone,
while you unsheathe the sharp sword by your thigh
and wait, but do not let the feeble dead
come near the blood till you have met Tiresias.
The lordly seer will soon enough approach
and say what course and distance you must sail
across the fish-filled seas to reach your home.’
“As she was speaking, gold-throned Dawn appeared.
The sorceress attired me, cloak and tunic,
and on her body draped a silver gown,
fine-spun. She tightened round her waist a belt,
pure gold, and placed a veil atop her hair.
I passed throughout her halls and waked my men,
one at a time, and warmly said to each:
‘Slumber no more, however sweet the sleep!
We will sail now, for so says regal Circe!’
“Each man I spoke to heard me and obeyed,
but even so, my crew was not intact.
Our youngest man, Elpenor, one of little
bravery on the field, a scatterbrain,
had left his fellow men in Circe’s halls
to take some air. He lay down drunk with wine.
He later heard his comrades’ merry revels,
and rose abruptly but forgot that he
had climbed a ladder to reach where he slept.
He plunged headlong off Circe’s roof, a fall
that broke his neck and sent his soul to Hades.
“I went among the men and spoke these words:
‘You talk perhaps of going home at last,
but Circe has ordained a different voyage:
to realms of Hades and Persephone
to learn our route from Theban seer Tiresias.’
“At this cruel news, their hearts began to race.
They sat down where they stood, wept, tore their hair,
but nothing was achieved through their display.
“While we were walking toward the sea and ship—
the men still grieving, warm tears streaming down—
fair Circe reached the craft ahead of us.
She tethered there a ram and black-fleeced ewe.
She passed us by unnoticed. Who could see
a goddess walk unless she willed it so.”


Book 11

“After we reached the ship at water’s edge,
we dragged the vessel to the sparkling surf.
We raised the mast and sail above the craft,
guided the sheep aboard, then we ourselves
climbed on, my men’s warm tears still streaming down.
Behind our dark-prowed ship there timely came
a welcome comrade—wind that filled the sail,
a gift from Circe, she of musical voice.
Throughout the ship each man adjusted rigging,
then most reclined as wind and helmsman steered.
The breeze ballooned the sail till day was done,
the sun sank low and shadow cloaked the sea.
“She reached our destination, Ocean’s rim,
where lay Cimmerion people’s land and city,
concealed in fog and cloud so dense they block
the sun’s bright beams from ever piercing through—
not when it journeys toward the starry heavens,
not when it turns from heaven back to earth.
These wretched men are always cloaked in dark.
We beached our ship and drove the sheep ashore,
where they and we advanced by Ocean’s streams
until we found the place described by Circe.
“Eurylochus and Perimedes held
the sheep while I unsheathed my whetted sword
and dug a pit, a measured cubit square.
For all the dead I poured around libations—
first blended honey, afterward sweet wine,
and water third. I scattered barley grains.
I made entreaty to the dead and vowed
to kill my finest ox in Ithaca
and burn it as a sacrifice for them,
and for Tiresias sacrifice a ram,
coal black, the noblest ram among my flocks.
When I had thus beseeched the hordes of dead,
I seized the animals and slaughtered both
inside the bloody pit. The shades approached,
from Erebus, the perished people’s souls:
young girls, young boys, the old who suffered long,
frolicsome maids with newly broken hearts,
and legions who had fallen struck by spears—
men slain in war who wore their armor still.
They fluttered round the pit, this way and that.
They howled, they screeched until I paled with fear.
I called my trusty men and ordered all
to flay then burn the sheep whose throats I cut
with merciless bronze, and afterward to pray
to mighty Hades, dread Persephone.
I drew again the sharp sword by my thigh
and sat but did not let the feeble dead
come near the blood before I met Tiresias.
“Elpenor’s was the shade that first approached.
He had not yet been laid beneath the ground,
for we had left his corpse in Circe’s halls—
unburied, unlamented—in our haste.
The sight of him disheartened me; I wept,
and when I found my voice I spoke these words:
‘How came you to the misty gloom, Elpenor,
arriving here on foot before my ship?’
“He listened, howled with grief, but gave an answer:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, 
Odysseus,foul fate and too much wine confounded me.
I drowsed on Circe’s roof, then failed to use
the ladder I had climbed to where I lay.
I tumbled headlong off the roof, a fall
that broke my neck and sent my soul to Hades.
I beg you, sir, by those you left behind:
your wife, the man who brought you up—your sire—
your only son Telemachus at home!
When you depart from Hades’ realm, I know
that you will steer your ship by isle Aeaea.
Remember me when you near there, my lord!
Do not sail on while I remain unburied,
lest you incur the wrath of deathless gods.
No, burn my corpse in armor that I wore,
and heap a monument at water’s edge
so people yet unborn will know of me.
That finished, plant an oar atop my tomb,
the oar I pulled when rowing with my comrades.’
“That was his prayer, and this was my reply:
‘O wretched soul, I will fulfill your wish.’
“So he and I exchanged our sorrowful words,
I sitting sword in hand to guard the blood,
while facing me my comrade’s shade implored.
“The next shade that approached me was my mother’s,
bold Autolycus’ daughter Anticleia,
still living when I left for hallowed Troy.
At sight of her I wept, I pitied her,
but nonetheless I would not let her near me—
and near the blood—before I met Tiresias.
“Then came his shade, Tiresias of Thebes’.
He held a golden staff and spoke to me:
‘Laertes’ strategizing son, Odysseus,
unlucky man, why did you leave the sun
and come among the dead in this bleak place?
Back off the pit you dug, put down the sword.
Then I will taste the blood and prophesy.’
“I put my silver-studded sword away,
slipped in its sheath; he drank the somber blood.
When done, the virtuous prophet spoke and said:
‘Odysseus, though you seek a glad return,
a god will make that hard. I do not see
that earth-shaking Poseidon will forget
his rage at you, who cost his son his sight.
Still, you and your comrades may reach your land
if you control yourself, control your men,
the day you land your well-constructed ship
on isle Thrinacia, seeking rest from waves.
There you will find the grazing cows and sheep
of Helios, god who sees and hears all things.
If you take care to let the cattle be,
you may surmount your trials and make it home.
But if you harm the beasts, I foresee doom
for ship and men, though you alone should live
and struggle home long hence—no ship, no crew—
to find when you arrive your house debased
by wanton men who waste your sustenance
and court your lovely wife with suitors’ gifts.
But you can make them pay for their misdeeds,
annihilate the suitors in your halls,
by using guile, and face-to-face with bronze.
That done, take up a balanced oar and walk
until you come to where men do not know
the sea, nor do they eat their food with salt,
nor do they know of ships with ruddy prows
or balanced oars—which are the wings of ships.
I will describe for you a telltale sign:
another wayfarer will come to you
and claim your shoulder bears a winnower’s fan.
Your journey ends there. Plant your oar in earth
and make fine sacrifice to lord Poseidon—
a ram, a bull, a lusty fattened boar—
then hasten home and offer hecatombs
to all the deathless gods who hold the skies,
in proper turn. To you from seaward, death
will come, the very gentlest kind, and claim you,
worn down by gradual age, among a folk
in plenty. I have spoken truthfully.’
“After he spoke, I answered him. I said:
‘The gods themselves spun these events, Tiresias.
But come now, speak to me of something else:
I see the shade of my dear mother here,
silent, beside the blood, lacking the will
to look me in the face or speak to me.
How can she come to recognize her son?’
“The legendary prophet said to me:
‘I can provide the answer you desire.
Among the shades, the ones that you allow
to reach the blood will speak the truth to you,
but those whom you refuse will fade away.’
“To Hades’ halls, that said, off flew the shade,
Tiresias, his prophecy pronounced.
I waited where I was until my mother
returned and drank the blood. She knew me then
and talked to me, lamenting as she spoke:
‘Child, how did you come to the misty gloom—
frightful to see—while you are yet alive?
It lies amid great rivers’ fearsome streams—
including Ocean, which you could not skirt
by land, but must have crossed by sturdy ship.
Did you meander here by chance from Troy
with ship and comrades? Have you not yet been
to Ithaca, not seen your wife and home?’
“She questioned me, and I replied to her:
‘I had no choice but steer to Hades, Mother,
to seek Tiresias’ aid and prophecy.
I have not found Achaea, let alone
my land. No, I have only toiled and roved
since first I followed Agamemnon’s fleet
to Ilium, there to fight Troy’s finest warriors.
But come now, answer truthfully my questions.
What means of wretched death defeated you?
A foul disease? Or was it Artemis,
whose gentle arrows shot and brought you down?
Tell me about my sire, the son I left.
Do they still honor me? Or by this time
another man, no hope for my return?
Tell me about the wife I wooed and won,
whether she waits steadfast, keeps watch for me,
or whether she has wed some fine Achaean.’
“My honored mother answered me forthrightly:
‘Her heart is resolute indeed. She waits
within your halls and grieves for you always.
Her tears cascade as nights and days stretch out.
No other holds your honored place. In fact,
your son attends your lands and takes your chair
at feasts, as might one who dispenses laws.
Your father still remains and waits as well,
out in the countryside—no place to sleep,
no bed, no mantle, blanket, coverlet.
He sleeps among the chambermaids in winter,
miserably clothed, in ashes near the fire.
But when warm weather comes, and harvest time,
he makes his bed within his vineyard slopes
wherever fallen leaves lie thick enough.
He lies grief-stricken, sadness swells his heart.
He yearns for you, but only old age comes.
From like distress I too declined, met fate.
The sharp-eyed goddess never graced my rooms
to end my life by means of gentle arrows,
nor did an illness strike, which oftentimes
erodes a mortal’s limbs and steals the spirit.
Odysseus, no, I pined for you, your counsel,
your kindly heart. That longing took my life.’
“What she said roiled my heart, and I desired
to clasp, embrace my perished mother’s shade.
Three times I tried to take her in my arms,
three times she fluttered off as might a dream
or shadow, leaving me but keen heartache.
At length, frustrated, I spoke out to her:
‘Why do you not remain for my embrace
and let us throw our arms around each other,
so we can take some pleasure while lamenting?
Are you a figment that Persephone
devised to make me suffer more than ever?’
“My honored mother hastened to reply:
‘Ah no, my child, the most ill-starred of men,
Persephone is not deceiving you.
Mine is the lot of every perished mortal.
The sinews that once joined the bone to flesh
are lost amid a furious blazing fire,
but not until the soul has fled the corpse.
It flickers like a dream and flies away.
Get back to daylight now! Let what you learned
be lore someday to tell your wife about.’
“So we conversed until a group of women—
provoked by dread Persephone—drew near,
daughters and wives of highest-ranking men.
The shadowy women thronged about the blood,
but I was keen to question each alone,
so after pondering, I forged a plan:
Once more I drew the sword beside my thigh
and barred the throng from coming near the gore.
One at a time the women stepped to me
and told their lineage till each had her say.
“The first I singled out was well-bred Tyro,
who claimed she was upright Salmoneus’ daughter
and wife of Cretheus, Aeolus’ son.
But her first love was river Enipeus,
the fairest stream that flows across the earth,
and near his waters she would often linger.
Disguised as him, the god who shakes the earth
made love with her beside the river’s mouth.
Around them rose a mountainous purple wave,
which arced above, concealing god and woman.
He showered sleep on her and loosed her girdle.
After the god was done with making love,
he squeezed her hand in his as he declared:
‘Have no regret, dear girl! The coming year
will bring two sons, since not for naught is sleep
with deathless gods. Take care and nurture them.
Go home now, keep our secret, nothing said.
In truth, I am Poseidon, shaker of earth.’
With that, he dived beneath the swelling sea.
“Pelias and Neleus were the sons she bore—
both fierce lieutenants of almighty Zeus.
Iolcus’ fields became the realm of Pelias,
with flocks of sheep. His twin ruled sandy Pylos.
She bore three other sons by Cretheus: Aeson,
Pheres and chariot fighter Amythaon.
“Antiope came next, Asopus’ daughter.
She claimed she passed a night in Zeus’s arms,
then bore two children, Zethus and Amphion,
the men who founded seven-gated Thebes.
They built its wall, without which no folk could
reside in safety there, however mighty.
“Next Amphitryon’s wife Alcmene came.
She bore a son—unflinching, lion-hearted
Heracles—after she lay with Zeus.
Next Megara, bold-hearted Creon’s daughter,
who was the wife of tireless Heracles.
“Jocasta was the next, Oedipus’ mother.
Unwittingly she broke an iron rule:
she wed her son. He killed his father first,
then married her, as gods made widely known.
He suffered grief in Thebes, yet nonetheless
he ruled the Cadmeans there by heaven’s will.
But she passed through the fearsome gates of Hades,
fastened a noose to roof beams, hanged herself
and nursed her sorrow. Him she left in torment,
the worst a mother’s Furies could bring on.
“Next Chloris came to me, the woman Neleus
courted with countless gifts and won to wed.
Iasus’ son Amphion was her sire,
he who ruled Minyans in Orchomenus.
Chloris, the queen in Pylos, bore three sons,
Nestor, Chromius and Periclymenus,
as well as winsome Pero—wonder to men.
Many pursued Pero, but Neleus balked—
unless a man could drive from Phylace
the wide-browed cows of mighty Iphiclus.
Only the seer Melampus undertook
to herd the cattle, but gods intervened
and gave him up to country herdsmen’s bondage.
But after time, as passing days made months,
until a full year’s seasons came and went,
powerful Iphiclus released the man,
since everything he knew had been disclosed.
“The next I met was Leda, Tyndareus’ wife,
who bore Tyndareus two ferocious sons,
horse-breaker Castor, boxer Polydeuces,
both buried in the fruitful earth alive.
Zeus honors them, though held beneath the ground,
so every other day they come to life,
then die the next, respected like immortals.
“Aloeus’ wife was next, Iphimedeia,
Poseidon’s one-time mistress, so they say,
who bore two sons both doomed to be short-lived:
Otus divine and famous Ephialtes,
the largest men who ever grew on earth,
and far the handsomest behind Orion.
Each was nine cubits wide at nine years old
and had a body full nine fathoms tall.
They dared the deathless gods on high Olympus
to take a stand against them, waging war.
They planned to move Mount Ossa to Olympus,
Pelion to Ossa’s side, and climb the skies.
They would have done it had they reached manhood,
but Zeus’s son Apollo slaughtered both
when only fuzz had grown beneath their temples,
before the beards had bloomed beneath their chins.
“Phaedra I met, Procris, Ariadne—
conniving Minos’ daughter, she whom Theseus
carried from Crete partway to sacred Athens,
but while they journeyed, Artemis killed the girl
by Dionysus’ will on island Dia.
“I met Clymene, Maera, Eriphyle,
who swapped her husband’s life for precious gold.
I could not tell about or mention all
the other heroes’ wives and daughters there
before this night is gone. Now is the time
for me to sleep, either aboard my ship
or here. May you or gods then guide me home.”
After he spoke, his listeners sat in silence,
held captivated through the shadowy room,
until at length white-armed Arete said:
“Phaeacians, how does this man seem to you,
his looks, his size, his level-headed thoughts?
You all have shared my honor as his host.
Let us not be too quick to send him hence,
and do not stint on gifts. We have a rich
supply of treasure thanks to heaven’s will.”
The warrior Echeneus spoke aloud,
the longest-lived of all Phaeacian men:
“My friends, our queen has not misunderstood,
nor does she flout our will. Let us pay heed—
although Alcinous has the final say.”
Taking his turn, Alcinous replied:
“It will be as she said as long as I
remain alive and rule Phaeacian oarsmen.
Our guest is homesick, but he must endure,
await tomorrow, while I mass our gifts.
Let his transport now be our chief concern—
especially mine, since I am master here.”
Supporting him, noble Odysseus said:
“Mighty Alcinous, foremost of men,
if you should bid me wait throughout a year
while you assemble gifts and launch our voyage,
I will approve because I much prefer
to reach my homeland’s shores with fuller hands,
which would ensure that I receive respect
from Ithacans who witness my return.”
Mighty Alcinous addressed his guest:
“Odysseus, you do not appear to us
to be a guileful man, as are the hordes
of men the dark earth cultivates and spreads,
men who concoct falsehoods no one perceives.
Your speech has grace, reveals a noble mind.
As might a poet, you have adroitly told
of Argive trials and those you faced yourself,
but now relate to us, unerringly,
if you have seen godlike comrades who went
to war with you and met their fates at Troy.
The night is long, and now is not the time
to sleep, so tell more tales of wondrous deeds.
I will remain till dawn as long as you
bear up and speak about your escapades.”
Answering him, gracious Odysseus said:
“Mighty Alcinous, master of hosts,
there is a time for speech, a time for sleep.
If you would listen longer, surely I
will speak of sorrows worse than I have told,
including those of warriors who fell,
not only on account of Trojan war cries,
but also some killed after they reached home.
“Divine Persephone dispersed the shades
of women—wives and daughters—after which
came Agamemnon’s shade, the son of Atreus,
grief-stricken, joined by shades of yet more men—
the men Aegisthus steered to fate and killed.
After he sipped the blood, he recognized me,
let loose a piercing cry, shed copious tears
and stretched his arms as if he would embrace,
but he no longer had the strength or substance
that had been in his limbs while yet he lived.
“I pitied what I saw and wept myself,
but when I found my voice I said to him:
‘Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon,
how did your fate of wretched death subdue you?
Perhaps Poseidon swept your ships away
by dint of furious blasts of screaming winds.
Or were you killed by hostile men on land
while you were driving off their sheep and oxen
or fighting for their womenfolk and city?
“The son of Atreus forthwith answered me:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
Poseidon did not kill me on a ship
by rousing screaming winds in furious blasts,
nor was I slain on land by hostile men.
Aegisthus brought about my fate, my death.
Yes. He and my pernicious wife killed me
during a feast as if I were an ox.
As I met wretched death, they also killed
my men, to them no more than common swine—
animals that a powerful wealthy man
might slaughter for a bounteous wedding feast.
You have encountered deaths of many men,
cut down in war, some killed by your own hand,
but nonetheless you would have grieved to see
the jars of wine and lavish tables there
and us prostrate in blood that pooled the floor.
The saddest cry I heard rose from Cassandra—
old Priam’s child, whom Clytemnestra killed
near me as I was crumpling toward the ground,
slain by a sword. Malevolent Clytemnestra,
shamelessly slighting me, did not see fit
to close my eyes or draw my lips together.
There is no thing more odious than a wife
whose heart connives and hatches such a scheme
as this one did when plotting wicked deeds—
her husband’s murder. I believed that when
I sailed back home, my kin and loyal servants
would welcome me, but her outrageous plot
brought shame on her and others yet unborn,
all women, even those who may be blameless.’
“He so declared, and I in turn replied:
‘Ah me, for Atreus’ seed far-thundering Zeus
foreordained grief imposed through women’s will.
First countless comrades died because of Helen,
then Clytemnestra engineered your doom.’
“Without a pause, he amplified the point:
‘Never be overly kind to any woman,
or tell her everything that you may think.
Tell part but let the rest be undisclosed.
Your wife will not bring death to you, Odysseus.
Icarius’ daughter, wise Penelope,
is circumspect, has only virtuous thoughts.
How young she was when we left her behind
and went to war. Your child was at her breast,
counted among young men by now, no doubt.
Blessed to see his sire arriving home,
he will embrace his father as is meet.
My wife did not permit that I behold
my son before she coldly had me killed.
Now I will tell you this to keep in mind:
enter your fathers’ cherished land disguised,
because one can no longer trust in women.
Speak to me truthfully of something else:
have you heard where my son is living now,
perhaps in Pylos, or Orchomenus,
or Sparta near my brother Menelaus?
Godlike Orestes has not died on earth.’
“He questioned me, and I replied to him:
‘Why ask of such a thing? I do not know,
and would be reckless if I gave an answer.’
“As we exchanged between us dolorous words
while standing there with warm tears spilling down,
the shade of Peleus’ son Achilles came,
Patroclus’ too, and brave Antilochus’,
and that of Ajax, who had been the best
Achaean warrior next to Peleus’ son.
“Aeacus’ fleet-foot grandson recognized
and spoke to me, dejected and downcast:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
what bolder feat than this could one devise?
Why dare you come to Hades, where the dead
repose as senseless shades of former mortals?’
“So spoke Achilles’ shade, and I replied:
‘Achilles, Peleus’ son, the mightiest Greek,
I came to seek Tiresias’ advice
on how I might return to Ithaca.
I have not found Achaean lands, or mine,
because of endless struggles. You, Achilles,
we glorified above the other Greeks,
honored you like a god while yet you lived,
and now you rule again, among the dead,
down here, so death has served you well, my friend.’
“He answered me straightway with this retort:
‘Do not make light of death to me, Odysseus.
I would prefer to labor tilling land
beside a poor man who had little food
rather than rule unnumbered hosts of shades.
Now speak a word to me about my son.
Did he become preeminent in war?
And tell me what you know of noble Peleus.
Is he esteemed among the Myrmidons,
or do they slight him now in Phthia and Hellas
because old age subdues his hands and feet?
I cannot lend support where sunbeams shine.
I am not as I once was outside Troy,
when I cut down their best and saved the Argives.
If I could be like that and visit him,
they soon would learn to hate my furious hands—
the men who bully him, deny him honor.’
“I offered this response to what he asked:
‘I have heard no report of noble Peleus,
but as to Neoptolemus, your son,
I will relate the truth as you request.
I took the youth aboard my hollow ship
at Skyros, thence to join the strong-greaved Greeks.
Whenever we laid plans concerning Troy,
he spoke up soon with words straight to the mark.
Nestor and I alone could rival him.
When we fought on the plains of Troy with bronze,
he never stayed among our mass of men,
but raced out front, his fury unsurpassed.
Numberless men he killed in dreadful strife.
I will not even try to name each one,
the host he slew to keep the Argives safe.
Telephus’ son was one of those he killed,
Eurypylus, along with all his troop,
Ceteans—gifts to a woman cost their lives.
No comelier Trojan lived apart from Memnon.
When we were in the horse Epeus made,
we bravest Greeks, myself put in command,
we closed it tight so as to lay an ambush.
Although most brave Achaean chiefs, our best,
were wiping tears and trembling at their joints,
I never saw your son show sign of fear.
His skin did not turn pale, nor did his cheeks
have tears to wipe. Indeed, he often asked
to climb out, leave the horse and wield his sword,
his heavy spear, intent on Trojan ruin.
When we had finished sacking Priam’s city,
he took his share, his spoils, aboard his ship
unscathed—not ever hit with whetted bronze
nor wounded fighting close, as oftentimes
can happen thanks to Ares’ random rage.’
“After I spoke, fleet-foot Achilles’ shade
strode high, off through the fields of asphodel,
delighted I had said his son was valiant.
“The shades from other bodies that had died
stepped forth and asked about the ones they loved,
although the shade of Ajax, Telamon’s son,
held back, aggrieved about the victory
I won beside the ships when we both sought
Achilles’ armor, which his mother tendered.
Young Trojans and Athena were the judges,
and how I wish that I had not prevailed.
Because I did, the earth now holds the head
of Ajax, who in size and deeds surpassed
the other Greeks except the son of Peleus.
I spoke to him, attempted soothing words:
‘Telamon’s son Ajax, is it not time
for you to shed your wrath about the armor?
Gods stirred that wrath to cause the Argives harm,
kill you, their bulwark. Over you the Greeks
lamented constantly, just as they had
upon Achilles’ death. There is no one
to blame, apart from Zeus, who came to loathe
the Argive force and laid on you your fate.
Come near, lord Ajax, so you hear my words:
suppress your rage and cool your fiery spirit.’
“He did not answer me, but followed fellow
shadowy souls of dead to Erebus.
He might have called to me, or I to him,
but by this time I had made up my mind
to meet with yet more shades of men who died.
“The next I met was Minos, Zeus’s son,
who held a golden staff and judged new dead.
He sat while they appealed to him for justice
from where they waited by the gates of Hades.
“I noticed after him immense Orion,
shepherding beasts out on the asphodel,
the shades of beasts he killed on lonely hills.
His club was solid bronze, unbreakable.
“Tityus next I saw, Earth’s glorious son.
His body lay on her, nine plethra long.
Around him vultures pecked away the liver
within his abdomen. His hands were useless—
the hands he forced on Leto, Zeus’s love,
when she was leaving Panopeus for Pytho.
“Tantalus, too, I saw, laden with grief.
He stood immersed in water to his chin
but could not take a sip, despite great thirst.
Each time the old man stooped and tried to drink,
the water sank away, till round his feet
parched ground appeared—dried up by heaven’s will.
Tall leafy trees dropped fruits above his head—
candescent apples, pomegranates, pears,
sugary figs and fleshy, ripened olives.
Each time the old man tried to catch a fruit,
a wind arose and blew it toward the clouds.
“I next saw Sisyphus, no less afflicted.
With both his hands he grasped a monstrous stone.
He strenuously toiled with arms and feet
to push it up a hill. But when he neared
the peak, the overwhelming weight prevailed;
the merciless stone rolled back to where he started.
Then he began to push again as sweat
poured off his limbs and dust rose round his head.
“I next took note of mighty Heracles—
a ghost since Heracles lives with the gods,
enjoying bounty, wed to slim-legged Hebe,
a child of sovereign Zeus and gold-shod Hera.
Around him swarmed the screaming shades like vultures,
confused, on every side. Resembling night,
he held his bow, an arrow to its string.
His fearsome glare meant he was set to shoot.
A sword strap crossed his chest, a fright to see,
a baldric made of gold, engraved to show
wilderness bears, wild boars, glowering lions,
battles and fights, mayhem and grim manslaughter.
Not by another’s craft were these created;
he made that belt himself, displayed his skill.
When he saw me, he realized who I was
and spoke to me in sympathetic words:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
poor wretch, you too received an ill-starred life,
such as I had to bear beneath the sun.
Although I was a son of Zeus, the grief
I bore was boundless while a lesser man
enslaved me, challenged me with arduous tasks.
He sent me here for Hades’ dog—a job
he thought the worst of trials that he could set,
but I retrieved the dog from Hades’ realm
with Hermes’ help, and gleaming-eyed Athena’s.’
“That said, he headed back in Hades’ halls,
but I stayed put in case more shades might come,
still more heroic men who died before.
Indeed, I did see two, revered of old,
Peirithous and Theseus, sons of gods,
but soon a crowd of shades assembled, massing,
ungodly loud, and I fell prey to fear
that grim Persephone might send at me
from Hades’ halls the dreadful Gorgon’s head.
“Straightway I found the ship and told my men
to climb aboard and loose the ropes astern.
They boarded fast and sat beside their oars.
Swells bore the ship down river Ocean’s streams;
we rowed at first, then flew before fair winds.”


Book 12

“After we left behind the river Ocean,
we plied the sea’s far-traveled waves and reached
Aeaea’s isle, where early-shining Dawn
and Helios reside until they rise.
When we arrived, we beached the ship on sand
and walked away along the water’s edge.
We slept while we awaited Dawn’s bright glow.
“As soon as Dawn displayed her rosy fingers,
I sent my comrades off to Circe’s halls
to find the corpse Elpenor left at death.
We cut and carried logs to outmost shores
for funeral rites, lamenting all the while.
After the corpse had burned, its armor on,
we heaped a mound. We dragged a stone above
and fixed a well-turned oar to top the tomb.
“Each man took part, and Circe did not fail
to notice us as we returned from Hades.
She dressed and joined us. Handmaids brought to her
assorted meats and bright red wine and breads.
The brilliant goddess stood with us and spoke:
‘Persistent men, alive you went to Hades!
Thus you die twice, though others only once!
Come now and eat some food, sip this sweet wine
the whole day through. When dawn again appears,
set sail, but I will first describe your route,
advise you, lest your own misguided plans
cause you to suffer more on land and sea.’
“She swayed the manly heart in each comrade,
so while day lasted, till the sun went down,
we feasted—tasty meats and sweet strong drink.
After the sun declined and darkness came,
the men lay down to sleep behind the ship,
but Circe took me by the hand apart,
reclined and asked me to tell what transpired.
I told her of adventures we encountered,
and regal Circe took her turn to speak:
‘Enough of past events, but listen now
to what I say—and may a god remind you.
First you will reach the Sirens, they who charm
whatever mortal men may come near them.
The unsuspecting man who hears their song
will never have his wife or little ones
rejoice when he returns to be with them.
The Sirens will enthrall him, singing sweetly,
from where they sit ashore amid the bones
of rotting men whose flesh has shrunk away.
So sail on by, but plug your comrades’ ears
so none may hear. Knead sweet beeswax for plugs.
Yet you yourself may hear if so you choose,
but only if you are bound hand and foot
with rope tied to the beam that holds the mast.
You soon will hear the Sirens’ heavenly voices.
If you entreat your men to set you free,
they should instead add still more bonds to hold you.
Your men in time will sail beyond the Sirens,
and I will not say where you should then steer,
but there will be alternatives, two routes
to choose from. I can tell you what they are.
One way lies under arching rocks toward which
roar dark-eyed Amphitrite’s monstrous waves.
The gods call these rocks Planktae, Wanderers,
and even flying birds cannot pass by, such as
the doves who bring ambrosia to Zeus.
The sheer rock does away with those as well,
but Zeus will send out more to compensate.
No mortals’ ship has yet escaped from there.
The sailors’ corpses mixed with vessels’ spars
are borne away by tempest, wave and fire.
There was one ship that safely made it past—
the Argo when she sailed from Aeetes,
although she would have crashed against the rocks,
but Hera steered her past for love of Jason.
“‘Cliffs rim the second route. One meets the sky,
its jagged summit cloaked in banks of cloud
that never ebbs, so never does clear air
surround that peak in summer or in fall.
No mortal man could light upon or scale it,
not even one with twenty hands and feet.
The surface is as smooth as polished stone.
Amid the cliff there gapes a misty cavern,
faced west toward Erebus, the realm whence you
just sailed your ship, illustrious Odysseus.
No man in prime of youth could reach that cave
by bow and arrow shot from vessel’s deck.
Inside it dwells the howling monster Scylla.
Her howls resemble those of newborn pups,
but she herself is giant. No one alive—
no man, no god—would gladly gaze upon her.
She has a dozen feet on coiling legs
and six extended necks, on each of which
is fixed a ghastly head with teeth—three rows,
close-set and sharp, portending blackest death.
Her lower body stays inside her grotto;
meantime she keeps her dreadful heads outside
and fishes there, nosing about the cliff
in case she might catch dolphins, dogfish, even
one of the monsters kept by Amphitrite.
Past Scylla not a sailor yet has claimed
safe passage for his crew, for every head
will pluck a seaman off his dark-prowed craft.
“‘As you will see, the facing cliff stands low,
quite near the first, about a bowshot distant.
Above it climbs a lofty, leafy fig,
while at its base Charybdis spouts black water—
three times a day—then sucks it down again,
horrendous. Do not be there when she sucks—
the earth-shaker himself could not protect you.
Instead approach the crag where Scylla dwells
and steer past there. Far better will it be
to lose six men than if not one survives.’
“So she advised, but I in turn inquired:
‘Speak further to me, goddess, tell the truth!
Is there no way to circumvent Charybdis
and overcome the one who seeks to kill?’
“The brilliant goddess answered me, impatient:
‘You stubborn man! You think of warlike acts
instead of backing down to deathless gods!
She is a deity, though a wicked one,
tempestuous, frightful, who cannot be fought.
No man has might enough, so you should flee.
If you should tarry long enough to arm,
I fear she might come at you yet again
with just as many heads and seize more sailors.
So as you row full speed, entreat Crataeis,
the monster’s mother, who brought forth that scourge,
and she may spare you from a new assault.
“‘Next comes Thrinacia, isle where Helios
turns out his cows to graze, his hardy sheep—
full seven herds of sheep, seven of cows,
full fifty head in each. They have no young,
nor do they die. Their herders are divine,
two fair-tressed nymphs—Phaethusa, Lampetie—
a pair the nymph Neaera bore to Helios.
Their honored mother bore and raised the two.
She sent them off to far Thrinacia’s isle
to guard their father’s cows and smaller beasts.
If you should leave those animals unharmed
you may reach Ithaca, though suffering much,
but if you harm them, I foresee the ruin
of ship and men. If you yourself escape,
you might reach home long hence with no comrades.’
“After she spoke, straightway rose gold-throned Dawn.
Up through her island Circe marched, divine,
but I strode toward my ship and spurred my men
to climb aboard, to loose the ropes astern.
They boarded, quickly found their seats at tholes,
each in his place, and churned the sea with oars.
From off the dark-prowed vessel’s stern soon came
a welcome friend—a wind that filled the sail.
The powerful fair-haired goddess Circe sent it.
The men secured the ropes about the ship,
which wind alone drove where the helmsman steered.
“With aching heart, I had to warn my crew:
‘It is not meet that only I should know
what Circe prophesied, the radiant goddess.
Now I will tell you. We will either die
or else perhaps escape and flee death’s fate.
She first commanded that we pass the Sirens,
escape their voices, shun their flowery meadow.
Just I alone will hear their song—while bound
where you will tie me so I cannot move.
Wrap ropes around the beam that holds the mast.
If I should order you to set me free,
what you must do is bind me tighter still.’
“Just so I passed that on to my crewmen.
Meanwhile the well-built ship abruptly reached
the Sirens’ island under helpful wind.
The breezes died and left our ship becalmed
on glossy depths. A god suppressed the waves.
The seamen rose and furled the vessel’s sail.
They stowed it underneath the forward deck,
then sat and rowed, oars leaving tracks of foam.
I took sharp bronze and cut a round of wax
in tiny bits, then used my hands to squeeze them.
The wax soon warmed by dint of both my strength
and rays of Helios, lord Hyperion’s son.
With wax I plugged the ears of every man.
In turn the crewmen bound me hand and foot—
ropes wrapped around the beam that holds the mast—
then took their seats again, oars thrashing brine.
We rowed about the distance shouts will carry
before the Sirens marked the speeding craft.
As we drew near them, they struck up their song:
‘Come here, Odysseus, pride of broad Achaea,
the ship can wait while you enjoy our singing!
Each man who sailed a dark-hued ship past here
has listened to the voice that leaves our lips,
then went his way delighted, also wiser.
We are aware of spacious Troy and all
that Greeks and Trojans bore to please gods’ whims.
We know whatever comes to pass on earth.’
“With that, they lofted lovely sounds that I
was keen to hear. I signaled men to free me—
arching my brows—but they stayed put and rowed,
except Eurylochus and Perimedes,
who added rope that bound me tighter still.
As soon as they had rowed beyond the point
where we could hear the Sirens’ sultry voice,
my trusty men straightway withdrew the wax
that I put in their ears, then set me free.
“No sooner had we passed that isle before
I saw a monstrous wave and smoke, heard thunder.
Oar handles flew from frightened sailors’ grasp,
the freed blades flapped on waves. The ship stopped there,
her men no longer holding oars to pull.
I walked up through the vessel, calmed the crew
with even-tempered words for every man:
‘Ah friend, we are not strangers to ordeals.
The trial at hand is less than when Cyclops
made us his captives in the bloodstained cave.
From him—thanks to my skill, my mind, my scheme—
we fled, and we will win the trials to come,
but you must each obey what I prescribe.
You must retrieve your oars and row again,
sit at your tholes, in hopes that Zeus perhaps
will grant that we escape our dooms and flee.
You, helmsman, this command I bid you mind,
since you alone will be our rudder’s guide:
steer well away from yonder mist and waves;
stay near the cliff and concentrate lest you
drift off from there, bring suffering on us all.’
“I spoke, and they at once obeyed my word.
I thought it profitless to speak of Scylla;
the men might grow afraid, might even leave
their oars and huddle in the vessel’s hold.
Myself, the stern command of Circe I
forgot, forgot she told me not to arm.
I dressed in burnished armor, took two spears
in hand and walked out on the vessel’s deck,
the prow where I would be the first to see
the cliff of Scylla, which would bring such grief.
I could not see it though I strained my eyes
by searching where the misty cliff might stand.
“We entered soon enough the narrow strait
where Scylla was, and opposite Charybdis,
who frightfully swallowed down the salty water,
then spewed it up as might a hot-fired kettle.
She boiled, she seethed, she swirled, she cast off foam,
which sprayed the craggy peaks on either side.
After she gulped the briny water down,
a whirling maelstrom near the cliff remained,
resounding, dreadful, bottomed on the earth,
sandy and dark. Pale terror gripped my men,
and every eye was on her, fearing doom,
but Scylla plucked six sailors off the ship—
six men among my best, my strongest hands.
As I glanced through the speeding ship and crew,
I noticed overhead their hands and feet,
far up, ascending. They yelled out to me,
called me by name in panic one last time.
As when atop a spit an angler stands
to offer food as bait, to trick the fish,
and casts below a hook of wild ox horn,
the catches that he pulls up gasp for breath,
so did my men gasp rising up the cliff.
They reached the cave, and she devoured them, screaming,
their arms outstretched to me in futile struggle.
It was the most horrific thing I saw
through years of trials I met exploring seas.
“After we left Charybdis far behind,
Scylla as well, we reached a sacred isle
where roamed a drove of handsome broad-browed cows,
livestock of Helios, Hyperion’s son.
While yet our ship remained at sea, offshore,
I heard the sound of penned-up cattle lowing,
the bleats of sheep, and I remembered then
what sightless Theban seer Tiresias’ shade
had counseled me, Aeaean Circe too:
avoid the isle of Helios, mortals’ light.
Though sick at heart, I had to tell my shipmates:
‘Listen to me, my ever-suffering men,
while I explain that seer Tiresias,
as well as Circe, told me more than once
to shun the isle of Helios, light of mortals,
where lies but dreadful ruin for us, they said.
So let us row our ship on past this island.’
“My words caused every seaman’s heart to ache.
Eurylochus alone spoke up, objecting:
‘For you, Odysseus, neither mind nor joints
fatigue, a man like iron through and through,
but we are worn by toil and lack of sleep.
Still you will not let us set foot ashore
where we could make ourselves a savory meal.
Instead you bid us wander through the dark,
depart this isle to roam the misty seas.
Nighttime is when the ship-destroying squalls
arise, and how can one not meet his doom
if suddenly there blows a whirling tempest,
ill winds from north or west, the fateful winds
that shatter ships despite the will of heaven?
No, we should surely yield to pitch-black night,
prepare a meal and rest beside the ship,
then board at dawn and sail the sea’s expanse.’
“The crewmen praised Eurylochus’ idea.
I was afraid a god had planned our ruin,
so straightway I proposed a compromise:
‘I stand alone; you win, Eurylochus,
but you men must swear me a solemn oath
that if we find a herd of cows or flock
of sheep, no man—no headstrong, reckless man—
will slaughter either sheep or cow; instead,
you men will eat the food that Circe gave.’
“The crewmen swore the oath that I proposed,
and after they had voiced their pledge to me,
we moored the sturdy ship within a bay,
beside freshwater springs, and disembarked.
The seamen skillfully prepared a meal
and soon dispatched desire for food or drink.
The crew shed tears recalling lost comrades,
shipmates that Scylla snatched and gobbled down.
At length sweet sleep stole on them as they wept.
Stars wheeled till but a third of night remained,
when Zeus aroused a violent, whistling wind—
unearthly tempest joined by clouds that hid
both earth and sea. From skyward darkness gushed.
As soon as Dawn extended rosy fingers,
we dragged the ship and moored it in a cave
where there were bands of comely dancing nymphs.
I there addressed the men assembled round me:
‘O friends, since there is food and drink aboard,
steer clear of yonder cows else we will suffer.
The cows and sheep are livestock of a god,
yes, Helios, who sees and hears all things.’
“The manly heart in every chest obeyed,
but South winds blew throughout a month—no winds
arose except the South and sometimes East.
“As long as food and ruddy wine remained,
the men ate eagerly, ignored the cows,
but when the ship’s provisions were consumed,
perforce they wandered far afield, hunting
for birds, or fish that they could bring to land
on curved bronze hooks. Sharp hunger cramped their bellies.
Myself, I walked up through the isle to pray
in hopes a god would show the route back home.
When I was far enough from my crewmen,
I stopped and washed my hands where no wind blew.
I prayed to deathless gods who hold Olympus,
and they strewed pleasing sleep on weary eyelids.
“Meanwhile Eurylochus voiced poor advice:
‘Attend what I will say, long-suffering comrades!
Of all the wretched ways for men to die,
starvation is the worst, most piteous fate.
So come! We should choose Helios’ finest cows
as sacrifice to those who hold the heavens,
and if we reach our homes in Ithaca,
straightway a temple just for Helios
we shall erect and fill with bounteous treasure.
Should he be vexed enough about his stock
to smash our ship with other gods’ support,
well, I would rather die by gulping brine
than starve and waste away on this bleak isle.’
“The men concurred with what Eurylochus said
and forthwith rounded up the choicest cattle.
Not far from where the dark-prowed ship lay beached,
there grazed fine curly-horned and broad-browed cows.
The men stood round the stock, beseeched the gods
and gathered leaves that fell from high-crowned oaks
(there were no barley grains aboard the ship).
When they had prayed, they killed and flayed the beasts,
cut off the thighs, enveloped those in fat
two layers thick, and placed meat bits on top.
For lack of wine to pour atop the blaze
while entrails cooked, they substituted water.
After the thighs burned up, they tasted vitals,
then carved and placed on spits what meat remained.
That was the moment sleep released my eyes,
and I walked back toward the shore and ship.
When I had almost reached the balanced craft,
the smell of burning fat surrounded me.
Heart-stricken, I reproached the deathless gods:
‘O Zeus and lesser blessed gods eternal!
You lulled me off to senseless sleep and ruin!
My men contrived to do a monstrous thing!’
“The message quickly came to Helios
through Lampetie: we had killed his cows.
He spoke among the gods with furious heart:
‘O Zeus and lesser blessed gods eternal!
Exact revenge from those, Odysseus’ men,
lawless, who killed my cows, the very beasts
I loved to watch while climbing up the sky
and while descending back to earth from heaven.
If those men do not pay a proper price,
my light and I will move to Hades’ realm!’
“In answer, cloud-amassing Zeus declared:
‘Shine on among immortals, Helios,
also among the mortal men on earth!
Soon I will hurl a thunderbolt and smash
their ship to bits amid the wine-hued sea!’
“Fair-haired Calypso told me Zeus said that;
she said she heard it straight from runner Hermes.
“I reached the shore, the ship, and when I did,
I took the men to task, but no way out
could we perceive, the cows already dead,
and soon the gods made omens manifest:
the hides began to crawl, the meat to wail—
both cooked and raw—as if the cows were lowing.
“Throughout the next six days, my loyal comrades
feasted on Helios’ finest slaughtered cows,
but when Zeus caused a seventh day to come,
the wind, the furious tempest, died away.
We boarded ship apace and put to sea,
our mast erect, our bright white canvas hoisted.
“After we left the isle behind, there was
no land in sight, just empty sea and sky.
The son of Cronus raised a purple cloud
above our hollow ship. The sea grew dark.
We did not travel long before there came
a howling Zephyrus, a raging storm,
a whirling wind that snapped the mast and forestays—
both sides. The broken mast fell backward, rigging
tumbled in bilge. Astern, the toppling mast
fell on the helmsman’s head and crushed his skull,
splintered the bone. As might a practiced diver,
he plunged, leaving the deck as his soul flew.
Zeus thundered, cast a lightning bolt amidship.
The craft gyrated, struck by Zeus’s missile;
the stench of sulphur spread, my men fell off.
Like waterfowl, around the ship’s remains
they bobbed on waves, their journey home foreclosed.
I stayed aboard until the ship’s hull burst,
flew from her keel. The waves dispersed her parts,
the mast washed toward the keel, and with the mast
its backstay followed, cut from ox’s hide.
With that I bound the mast and keel together,
sat down on top and rode the fearsome winds.
“Zephyrus’ tempest died away in time,
but soon a south wind rose, awaking fear
I would retrace the route to dread Charybdis.
Wind bore me through the night till sunrise, when
I reached Charybdis, facing Scylla’s cliff,
and she was sucking down the briny sea.
I grabbed a fig tree’s trunk above my head
and clung as might a bat. There was no way
to climb the tree, no way to plant my feet.
The roots were too far down, the limbs too high,
extending wide enough to shade Charybdis.
I held on fast until she might disgorge
the mast and keel, and as I hoped, she did—
but late: the hour a man would leave assembly
after he judged disputes of numerous youths.
At that late hour, the ship’s drowned timbers surfaced,
so right away I dropped on feet and hands,
crashing atop the shattered vessel’s beams.
I sat down there and used my hands to paddle.
The father of gods and men did not let Scylla
notice me, else I would not have lived.
“From there, nine days I drifted. During the tenth night
gods brought me near Ogygia, where Calypso,
divine, with beauteous hair and voice, resides.
She loved and kept me. But why tell this story?
I told it in your halls just yesterday,
told you, your lovely wife. Tiresome it is
to resurrect a tale already told.”


Book 13

After Odysseus spoke, the men were hushed,
spellbound throughout the roomy, shadowy hall,
until at length Alcinous answered him:
“Odysseus, now that you have reached my hearth,
I say that nothing else can drive you back,
thwart your return despite what you endured.
With this command, I order each Phaeacian,
whoever in my halls the vintage wine
has often drunk and heard the minstrel sing.
In yonder well-built coffer, clothes for him
already lie, wrought gold, and every sort
of gift Phaeacian elders earlier brought.
But each should give a kettle and tripod,
for which we shall have public reimbursement
so no one’s gift will cause undue privation.”
Alcinous’ listeners approved his words,
and each set out for home prepared to sleep.
As soon as early Dawn’s red fingers gleamed,
Phaeacians set their new gifts by the ship.
Sacred Alcinous, the mighty, stowed
them underneath the benches lest they might
impede men’s rowing when they plied their oars.
Tack in Alcinous’ halls, a feast ensued.
The hallowed monarch sacrificed an ox
to Zeus, who, wrapped in somber cloud, rules all.
They burned the thighs for Zeus, then had their feast,
delightful, while the godly minstrel sang,
revered Demodocus. Odysseus, though,
turned often and assayed the sinking sun,
as if to speed its set so they would sail.
As when a man craves food, one who for hours
has driven oxen plowing hard-packed land,
and glad is he to see the sun go down
so he can rest his weary knees and eat,
thus did Odysseus welcome that day’s end,
and he addressed the rowing-fond Phaeacians,
addressed Alcinous especially:
“Alcinous, preeminent of men,
send me in peace, and may you folk be blest!
You have provided more than I could wish:
escort and friendship gifts. May heaven’s gods
make them good luck for me, that I may find
my wife and loved ones safe when I reach home.
May you remaining here delight your wives
and little ones. May heaven favor you
in every way, and keep you free of ills.”
The people heard his words, and they approved
an escort for the guest who spoke so well.
Mighty Alcinous addressed his herald:
“Pontonous, mix a bowl of wine to pass
among my guests here. After prayer to Zeus,
we shall begin Odysseus’ homeward voyage.”
At that, Pontonous blended honeyed wine.
He passed it round the room, and to the gods
who hold the endless skies, they poured libation,
each man from where he sat. Odysseus stood.
He raised a loving cup to Queen Arete,
and as he did, he offered mellow words:
“Best wishes, Queen, forever, till old age
and death arrive, the destinies of mortals.
I go now, leaving you to love these halls,
your children, folk and lord, Alcinous!”
That said, Odysseus stepped across the threshold,
and lord Alcinous dispatched a guide
to show him how to reach the shore and ship.
Arete sent along three servant maids.
One brought a cloak and tunic, finely weaved;
a second brought the chest, securely tied;
a third maid carried bread and ruddy wine.
When they came down to where the ship lay moored,
Phaeacians quickly stowed what gifts remained,
also the food and drink, aboard the craft.
They laid their guest a pallet—sheet and cover—
where he could savor peaceful sleep on deck,
astern. Odysseus climbed aboard and lay
without a word. The rowers sat at tholes,
and men loosed hawsers moored to ring-shaped stones.
The oarsmen leaned, they churned the sea with oars
while gentle sleep caressed Odysseus’ eyelids,
untroubled, deep, almost resembling death.
As when four stallions yoked abreast on flats,
straining as one beneath the lash’s strokes,
take flight and easily race across their course,
so did the vessel’s stern rise high and surge
across the thundering sea’s great purple waves,
always on course, unswerving, fast. No hawk
could keep her pace, the swiftest winged creature.
In such a way she ran and sliced the billows.
She bore a man whose shrewdness matched a god’s,
whose heart had known vicissitude and grief
in wars of men, in trials on treacherous seas,
but who now slept in peace, his woes forgotten.
The hour came when the brightest star arose,
the star that heralds early-rising Dawn.
When that star rose, the vessel reached an island.
The old sea deity Phorcys has a bay
on Ithaca. It has two promontories,
both tall, both steep, headlands that hug the cove
and screen the giant waves, the furious winds
outside, while inside ships remain untied
and calm, the crafts that seek a moorage there.
At harbor’s head there grows a leafy olive,
and near the olive gapes an airy cave,
a holy place to nymphs they call Naiads.
Inside are double-handled jars and bowls
of stone in which wild bees amass their honey.
Also inside are tall stone looms where nymphs
weave cloth with sea-like hues, amazing fabrics.
Fresh water flows within. The cave has gates,
one northerly for mortal men to use,
one southerly for gods. Never through it
do men proceed; only the gods tread there.
The oarsmen knew the bay and rowed straight in.
They drove the ship onshore for half its length,
speeding by dint of rowers’ forceful arms.
The seamen left their well-built ship for land,
then straightway off the ship they brought Odysseus—
the man, his glistering sheets, his coverlets—
and placed him on the beach, still sound asleep.
They next removed the load of gifts Phaeacians
brought from their homes beneath Athena’s sway.
They piled the treasure by the olive trunk,
well off the path in case a wanderer
might come along before Odysseus waked.
That done, they headed home. Poseidon, though,
did not forget the threats against Odysseus,
threats he once made, and he inquired of Zeus:
“Among immortals, father Zeus, no more
will I be hailed, since mortals shame me now:
Phaeacians, who enjoy my own ancestry.
I have declared Odysseus must be taxed,
though I could not preclude his coming home,
not since you said he would and gave your nod.
Phaeacians rowed him over seas, asleep,
to Ithaca, and left him there with gifts
of gold, of bronze, of clothes, of woven goods—
far more than he would have brought home from Troy
had he returned with his allotment safe.”
To that, the cloud-amasser Zeus replied:
“Powerful tremor-maker, what have you said?
No gods dishonor you! Hard would it be
to slight an elder held in such esteem!
But if a mortal, overconfident,
should show you disrespect, why, take revenge!
Do what you wish, whatever pleases you.”
The earth-shaker Poseidon answered Zeus:
“Cloud-darkener, I will do as you say.
I always give your wishes due regard.
Right now the grand Phaeacian ship returns
across the seas, its transport mission done.
So that Phaeacians transport no more mortals,
I must destroy their ship and hide their town.”
Answering that, cloud-gathering Zeus declared:
“All right, but let me say what I prefer.
Delay to let Phaeacians see the ship,
near land just off their shores. Turn it to stone,
the vessel’s shape. The men will be amazed,
the men who watch. Then hide their town in hills.”
As soon as earth-shaking Poseidon heard,
he sped to where Phaeacians live, on Scheria.
He waited there until the ship drew near,
speeding to land. The tremor-maker rose
and turned her into stone, anchored in seabed.
A single slap did that, then he was gone.
On shore the people spoke to one another,
long-oared Phaeacians, famous mariners,
and one might ask another standing near:
“Do eyes deceive, or has our ship been stopped
when just come into view while speeding home?”
So one might ask, but none knew what transpired.
Alcinous soon spoke out among them, saying:
“I heard an ancient god-made dictum once.
My father told me lord Poseidon seethed
at us because we give transport to all.
One day, he said, Poseidon will destroy
a grand Phaeacian ship—bound home from transport,
plying the seas—then ring our town with mountains.
So said that aged man, and now it happens.
Now, come! Let each of you do as I say.
No longer transport every man who comes
to us. To soothe Poseidon’s wrath, twelve bulls
shall be our holy sacrifice, in hopes
that he will not surround our town with peaks.”
The people, struck with dread, prepared the beasts.
While fervent prayers entreated lord Poseidon,
and while Phaeacian leaders, chiefs and folk
stood round the bulls, divine Odysseus waked
but did not recognize his fatherland,
so long unseen. With mist a goddess cloaked him—
Pallas Athena, Zeus’s child—so that
he would remain unrecognized, unknown
to all his people, friends and even wife
until the suitors paid for their misdeeds.
She made his land look strange to him, its lord,
the pathways, bays, accommodating harbors,
towering cliffs, proliferating forests.
He stood and gazed upon his fathers’ shores,
released a cry of grief and smacked his thighs
with flattened palms, speaking a rueful word:
“Ah me! Again I come to mortals’ land,
but will they be defiant, wild and lawless,
or will they be godfearing, warm to strangers?
Where will I hide these gifts? And me? Which way
to go? I should have stayed among Phaeacians,
the folk and their most powerful of kings,
who treated me so well and offered transport.
I wonder where to put these gifts. If I
should leave them here, some man might cart them off.
I see my hosts were not entirely true.
Phaeacian councilors and overlords
who sent me here to alien soil agreed
to carry me to Ithaca, but failed
to keep their word. May they atone to Zeus,
who watches for and punishes transgressors.
First thing, I ought to tally up my goods
in case Phaeacians robbed me while I slept.”
He counted every kettle, each tripod,
the gold, the garments—finely woven clothes.
Nothing was lost. He craved his fatherland
and crept along its shore by boisterous seas,
lamenting, lonely, till Athena came.
In form she looked to be a youthful goatherd,
but dignified as are the sons of kings.
Her shoulders wore a heavy woven cloak.
Fine sandals graced her feet. She held a spear.
Odysseus smiled to see another man,
and when he found his voice the words gushed out:
“The first man I have seen since I arrived!
Greetings! And may you bear me no ill will!
But help protect these goods and me, for I
am at your knees as if you were a god!
Reveal some truths to me, that I may know.
What land is this? What mortals dwell within?
Is this an island or perhaps the shore
of fertile mainlands sloping toward the sea?”
The goddess, gleaming-eyed Athena, said:
“You must have come from far away if you
need ask about this land, which by no means
has little fame. Indeed, it is well known
to those who dwell toward the dawn, the sunrise,
and those who dwell the other way, toward gloom.
The land is rough, not good for breeding horses.
It is not broad, but it is not unfruitful.
Abundant grain grows here, and grapes for wine
as well, for there are ample rains and dews.
For goats and oxen, grazing here is lush,
since nearby water courses never fail.
The fame of island Ithaca reached Troy,
they say, far distant from Achaean lands.”
When he heard that, downcast Odysseus beamed
to be upon the land that she described,
Athena, aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter.
In turn he spoke to her, smooth-sounding words,
but not entirely true. He held truth back,
alert to seize advantage if he could.
“I heard of Ithaca in spacious Crete
across the seas, and now I have arrived,
with chattels. I was forced to leave my kin
because I killed Idomeneus’ young son—
fleet-foot Orsilochus, the Cretan who
could outrun every fellow man afoot.
He had in mind to take away my spoils
from Troy—the spoils I labored for and earned
in strife, then carried forth on treacherous waves.
He chafed because I would not serve his sire
in Troy, where I had my own men to lead.
My bronze spear struck Orsilochus when he
had left his fields. One man and I laid ambush.
Black night eclipsed the sky that day so no one,
not any mortal, saw me take his life.
After I killed the man with whetted bronze,
I chanced upon a ship sailed by Phoenicians,
whom I solicited with precious gifts,
and they agreed to set me down in Pylos,
or else in Elis where Epeans rule.
Near there a powerful wind drove them offshore
against their will—they did not mean to cheat me.
Driven from there, we came here late at night
and rowed into this bay. Not one of us
so much as thought of food, though we were hungry.
Instead we disembarked, lay on the strand.
Sweet sleep soon overcame me, being weary.
Phoenician men unloaded my possessions,
left each upon the sand near where I lay,
then they embarked for well-constructed Sidon
while I remained behind with troubled heart.”
At those words gleaming-eyed Athena smiled,
caressed him, changed herself to female form—
beautiful, tall, expert at dazzling crafts.
She used a woman’s voice to speak to him:
“Shrewd would he be, whoever could fool you
with any sort of trick—even a god.
Tenacious, guileful man, how loath you are—
though in your fatherland—to put aside
the foxy tale-telling you love so well.
Let us no longer speak of this, both versed
in stratagems. Of mortals you are best
at speech and counsel, while among the gods
I am renowned. You did not recognize
Athena, Zeus’s daughter, I who have
stood by and guarded you in grievous trials.
I caused Phaeacian folk to be your friends,
and now I have come here to plan with you.
Your treasure I will hide, the goods Phaeacians
lavished on you according to my plan.
And I will speak about your home, its fate,
the grief to come, which you must take in stride.
Do not tell any man, or any woman,
that you have come ashore. No, hold your tongue
and suffer through abuse from brutal men.”
To that, the cunning Ithacan replied:
“You would be hard for any man to know,
however keen, you take so many forms!
I know full well how kind you were to me
the years Achaea’s sons waged war at Troy.
But after we ransacked Priam’s citadel,
we launched our ships, and gods dispersed the Greeks.
I did not see you, dreaded Zeus’s daughter,
aboard my ship where you could spare me grief.
Ah no, with stricken heart, year after year
I roamed until the gods relieved my ills,
and you led me among Phaeacian men,
into their city, seeded me with hope.
I plead now in your father’s name. I doubt
that this is Ithaca instead of strange
terrain that I must roam. I fear you dupe me,
speak words designed to lead my mind astray.
Say truly, have I reached my fatherland?”
In answer, gleaming-eyed Athena said:
“Your mind always produces such concerns,
but I cannot let you remain perplexed.
You are so cautious, prudent, skeptical.
Another wanderer who reached his shores
might hasten home to see his wife and children,
but you show no desire to go to them
until you test your wife, though as always
she sits at home, forever missing you,
pining away in tears both day and night.
I never was concerned, since in my heart
I knew you would come here, your comrades lost,
but I had no desire to fight Poseidon,
my father’s brother, who became enraged
because you put his cherished son’s eye out.
But now see Ithaca and be convinced!
Here is the bay of ancient sea god Phorcys,
and at bay’s head the long-leafed olive tree.
Nearby you see the lovely, misty cave,
the holy place to nymphs that men call Naiads,
the sheltered cavern where so many times
you sacrificed for nymphs fine hecatombs.
Mount Neriton stands yonder, clothed in woods.”
She goddess, as she spoke, removed the mist,
and when his vision cleared, Odysseus beamed,
saluted Ithaca and kissed the ground.
He called upon the nymphs with arms outstretched:
“O nymphs! O Naiads! Never again, I thought,
would I see you! Now let my joyful prayers
be welcome! We will bring you gifts again
if Zeus’s plunder-loving daughter lets
me live and lets my cherished son reach manhood.”
Soddess Athena, eyes aglow, declared:
“Take heart! Let thoughts like those be no concern!
Instead we now should move your goods to where
they will stay safe—the cavern’s nether reach.
That done, we two will plan a course of action.”
Shat said, the goddess walked into the cavern.
She searched for hiding places as the man
brought in the yellow gold, unyielding bronze
and fine embroidered clothes Phaeacians gave.
She placed a heavy stone to block the entrance,
Athena, aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter.
The two took seats beneath the olive tree
to plan how best to slay the strutting suitors.
The first to speak was gleaming-eyed Athena:
“Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
consider how to best the shameless courters,
for three years now the lords of your main hall.
With gifts they woo your wife, much like a goddess,
and though her heart craves only your return,
she fans each suitor’s hopes with promises,
sends messages that hide her true desires.”
Answering her, astute Odysseus said:
“I was about to suffer in my halls
the fate of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
had you not told me, goddess, what awaits.
Now weave a plan by which I make them pay.
Stand by me, charge my spirit, charge my heart,
as when we felled the battlements of Troy!
If you—your gleaming eyes—will stand by me,
I will take on three hundred men at once,
respected goddess, trusting your support.”
Athena, bright-eyed goddess, answered him:
“Depend on me beside you, vigilant,
as we achieve our goals, and I dare say
that we will splash your floor with blood and brains
of those who court your wife, who waste your wealth.
I will make you unrecognizable:
shrivel the flesh that coats your supple limbs;
remove the hair atop your head; dress you
in tattered rags that any man would scorn;
put out the light that shines within your eyes.
To suitors you will seem a wretched man,
and to the wife and son you left behind.
The next step is for you to greet the swineherd,
loyal to you, the man who tends your hogs.
He loves your son and shrewd Penelope.
Look for him with the drove of pigs that stays
at Arethusa’s spring near Raven Rock,
where there are nuts to eat and dark, deep pools
to drink from—all ideal for fattening swine.
Wait there with him and learn how matters stand.
I go to Sparta, where the girls are fair,
to find your son Telemachus, Odysseus.
He went to Menelaus in Lacedaemon
to seek out news of whether you yet live.”
St that, astute Odysseus said to her:
“Why did you not reveal the truth to him?
Did you want him to suffer ills and roam
the restless seas while others eat our stores?”
The gleaming-eyed divinity replied:
“Let not his welfare cause concern for you.
I guided him, so he could win renown
by going there. He suffers not; at ease
he sits in Menelaus’ well-stocked halls.
An ambush waits aboard a dusky ship
to murder him as he sails home again,
but it will fail. Instead the earth will hold
the courting men who dissipate your wealth.”
That said, on him Athena laid her wand.
She shrank the flesh upon his arms and legs,
removed his tawny hair, transformed his skin
to skin like what an aged man would wear,
put out the light that gleamed within his eyes,
cast round him ragged cloak and tattered tunic,
slovenly, grimy, reeking greasy smoke.
Over the clothes she draped a great deerhide,
worn smooth, gave him a staff and beggar’s bag,
shot full of holes, hung from a belt of twine.
Their plan afoot, their ways diverged. Hers led
to fetch Odysseus’ son from Lacedaemon.


Book 14

Odysseus clambered up a rugged path
through wooded highland tracts to where Athena
said he would find the pigs and faithful herder
who took devoted care of his lord’s stores.
The man was in his lodge within a farmyard.
The yard lay in a clearing, ringed by fence,
sturdy and tall, a fence the swineherd once
had built to hold the pigs his master left,
far from his master’s wife and old Laertes.
The fence was heavy boulders, topped with thorns
and backed by close-set stakes the swineherd drove,
dense stakes he made by splitting heavy oak.
Inside the yard he built a dozen sties,
adjoining one another, and in each
on muddy ground there wallowed fifty sows
with recent young. He kept the boars apart—
those still alive, so many had been food
for powerful thieving suitors who required
a steady stream of just the finest hogs,
until three hundred and three score remained.
Beside the yard were watchdogs—like wild beasts—
four dogs the worthy swineherd raised himself.
The man was fitting sandals to his feet,
cutting a strip of ox’s hide. His help
were not about. To drive the herds of pigs,
he sent three aides. The fourth he sent to town,
leading a hog the suitors requisitioned,
which they would kill, then gorge upon its flesh.
The howling dogs descried Odysseus’ presence.
They raced around him barking, fierce, but he
sat down unfazed and cast his staff aside.
There by the yard he might have suffered harm
had not the swineherd run on nimble legs
out through the entrance, dropping his leather strip.
He shooed the dogs, with shouts as loud as barks
and rain of stones. He then addressed his lord:
“Old man, those dogs would tear you limb from limb,
and quickly, too, thus heaping shame on me.
The gods have given me travail enough:
sorrowing for my matchless master, lost.
I stay and raise these hogs and sows for knaves
to eat while he may well be short of food,
driven off course to foreign towns and peoples,
if he indeed still lives and sees the sun.
Now let us go inside, old man, where you
may have the bread and wine your belly craves
and tell where you have been, what you endured.”
That said, the swineherd led him to the lodge.
He laid down woolly cloths where he could sit
and spread his guest a wild goat’s shaggy hide,
the one that he slept on. Odysseus warmed
to be so well received, and spoke these words:
“May Zeus and fellow gods grant you—my host
who took me in—whatever you desire.”
Then you, swineherd Eumaeus, said to him:
“However low he seems, it is not meet
to slight a wayfarer. They come from Zeus—
strangers and tramps. A minor friendly gift
is what I offer, apt for me, a servant,
ever in fear of masters, heavy-handed,
though striplings. Gods debar return of him
who loved me so, bestowed on me possessions—
a home, some land, a woman many wooed—
the things a generous lord would give his minion,
a loyal man whose work gods magnified.
The gods proliferate the tasks I have,
and so my master honored me while here,
but he is dead, as Helen’s stock should be
in recompense for men who died for her.
For Agamemnon’s pride, my master sailed
to Troy, where he could fight against the Trojans.”
Sith that, he grasped a belt, cinched up his tunic
and headed out to where he kept young pigs.
Of those he brought in two and slaughtered both.
He cut them into strips, which he then spitted,
roasted and set before his guest Odysseus,
still warm on spits. On top he sprinkled barley.
He fetched a wooden bowl, mixed honeyed wine
and, seated opposite his guest, declared:
“Guest, eat the food a servant has to offer.
The suitors eat the full-grown, fattened hogs.
They have no shame, they do not know restraint.
The blessed gods should not approve such excess,
but ought to honor just and seemly deeds.
Why, even when a band of hostile men
invade a foreign land where Zeus grants spoils,
shiploads of spoils for them to carry home,
why, even men like that fear heaven’s wrath.
Not these men here. They may have heard from gods
about my master’s death. They do not just
pay court to woo his wife and go. They lounge,
devouring precious stores with nothing spared.
On every day and night that Zeus creates,
they slaughter not just one and not just two.
They drain the wine away without reserve.
My lord possessed abundant wealth, unmatched
by men who dwell upon the shady mainland
or Ithaca. No twenty men combined
possess such wealth. Let me describe his stock:
twelve mainland herds of cows, the same of sheep,
as many herds of goats and droves of swine,
all pastured there and kept by mainland herdsmen,
while here eleven herds of wandering goats
graze near the island’s end, good men in charge.
Each day, each man presents before the wooers
the goat that he has judged to be the fattest.
So I, who am the overseer of pigs,
select the fattest, send it to the suitors.”
Meanwhile Odysseus ate his meat, drank wine
and silently devised the suitors’ ruin.
After he slaked his appetite for food,
Eumaeus handed him a drinking bowl
refilled with wine, which he accepted warmly,
and soon—relaxed—he asked his host a question:
“Ah friend, what is his name, the man you serve,
the man of wealth and power you described?
You say he died for Agamemnon’s sake,
now name him since I might have come to know him.
The deathless gods, among them Zeus, know well
I roamed afar. We might have chanced to meet.”
The master swineherd did not hesitate:
“Old sir, no wandering man who reached this isle
brought news my master’s wife and son believed.
Oh, no, the wretched vagrants, coveting food,
chose not to speak the truth, preferred deceit.
Every wanderer who landed here
told obvious lies when he spoke to my mistress.
She greeted every wayfarer with warmth
despite the tears that flowed beneath her eyelids—
expected when a husband dies abroad.
Soon even you, old man, might twist your words 
to get a gift of clothing—cloak and tunic.
No doubt by now the circling birds and dogs
have pulled my lord’s skin off his soulless bones,
or hungry fish have left his skeleton
to lie beneath some shoreland’s myriad sands.
So has he died and caused loved ones to grieve,
especially me, for never will I meet
a lord so kind, no matter where I go,
not even if I could rejoin my parents
at home where they begot and brought me up.
I do not long for them—though I would like
these eyes to see my fatherland again.
I only long for his return: Odysseus.
While he is gone I rarely use his name,
I so respect the way he cared for me.
I still refer to him as lord, though absent.”
Divine unshakable Odysseus said:
“Friend, though you have denied he lives, and think,
now losing heart, that he will not appear,
I will not merely say, I give an oath—
Odysseus shall return. Praise my insight,
not now but when he has arrived at home.
On that day give me clothing, cloak and tunic,
which I will not accept till then, though needy.
To me, detestable as Hades’ gates
is he who lets his need beget untruths.
I swear by Zeus, by this convivial table,
and by Odysseus’ hearth, where I go next:
what I predict to you shall come to pass.
Odysseus shall arrive within the year.
Indeed, when this month ebbs or next month dawns,
he shall return and take revenge on those
who shamed the honor of his wife or son.”
Swineherd Eumaeus answered him and said:
“Old sir, I do not credit what you say,
nor will Odysseus yet come home. Relax,
and drink, let us forget this lest I dwell
on thoughts that cause the heart within my chest
to grieve—the memory of my lord and master.
We will forget about your oath. My lord
may come as many wish—Penelope,
his wife, Laertes and Telemachus,
Odysseus’ son, for whom I am concerned.
The gods raised him till he was like a young tree,
and I thought he would be no lesser man
in looks or build than his beloved father,
but some immortal fooled his able mind
and he set out to learn about his sire.
He sailed to sandy Pylos, but the suitors
lurk in an ambush, bound to put to death
Arcesius’ last offspring in Ithaca.
That will be as it may. He may be killed
or else escape with Zeus’s helping hand.
Now you, old sir, tell me your own travails,
and tell me truthfully that I may know.
Who are your folk? Where are your kin, your city?
What sort of ship have you? How did your crew
find Ithaca? Who are your men, your sailors?
I do not think you traveled here on foot.”
Odysseus gave the man a sly response:
“I will give truthful answers to your questions.
If at this time we two had food enough
and strong sweet wine to savor in your camp,
so we could feast at ease while others work,
why, even if a full year’s time should pass,
I could not tell the trials I have been through,
how I have suffered, vexed at heaven’s whims.
“I claim my bloodline stems from spacious Crete,
a rich man’s child, one of the many sons
that he begot and raised within his halls—
legitimate save me. He bought my mother,
a concubine, but treated me as lawful.
Castor he was, Hylax’s son, my forebear,
revered in Crete as if he were divine,
known for his sons, for wealth, for happiness,
until the fate of death transported him
to Hades’ realm. His sons split up his wealth—
his lawful sons—by means of casting lots.
To me they gave a house, but little else.
I took a wife away from propertied men
by dint of skill, as I was neither weak
nor cowardly. The might I had is lost,
but as they say, the stubble gives a hint
of what once grew, before I suffered so.
My courage came from Ares and Athena.
Whenever I selected men for ambush,
the bravest men, designing death for foes,
my manly heart contained no fear of death,
no, I would take my spear out front and kill
whatever enemy I could run down.
So did I fight, but I did not like work,
or household life or raising able sons.
More dear to me were oar-outfitted ships,
the wars of men, the polished spears, the arrows,
unlike so many men who shrink from conflict.
Perhaps a god ordained what I would like.
Another man might find his pleasure elsewhere.
Before Achaea’s sons embarked for Troy,
for nine long years I led forays by sea
to foreign lands and captured plenteous spoils.
I took what part I liked, and what remained
I parceled out. My fortune swelled enough
that I attained respect among the Cretans.
But when far-thundering Zeus ordained the voyage
that caused collapse of countless warriors’ legs,
it fell upon Idomeneus and me
to lead our ships to Troy. There was no way
we could refuse the people’s firm demand.
Achaea’s sons waged war for nine full years,
and in the tenth we sacked the town and sailed
our ships toward home. A god dispersed the Greeks,
and Zeus ordained that I should suffer trials.
A single month I had to see my children,
my lawful wife, my properties, before
my spirit bade me set my sails for Egypt,
in vessels well prepared with crews like gods.
Nine ships I readied, rounded up the men.
Then six fine days my worthy comrades spent
at banquet tables; meanwhile I brought beasts
for sacrifices, and for table fare.
The seventh day we left Crete’s rolling fields
and sailed before a perfect northerly,
sailed easily as if downstream. No man
aboard my vessels toiled, and none fell sick.
The wind alone—and helmsmen—drove the ships.
“The fifth day out, we reached wide-flowing Nile
and moored our crescent ships in Egypt’s river.
Once there, I gave my worthy comrades orders
to wait beside the crafts and guard them well
while I dispatched our scouts to lookout posts.
The men gave way to arrogance, to whim.
They ravaged nearby fine Egyptian lands,
abducted comely wives, the budding children,
and killed the men. Their war cry reached the city,
where men knew what it meant. At dawn’s first light
they filled the plain with men—on foot, on horse—
and glittering arms. The lightning-lover, Zeus,
sowed dread among my men, and none had heart
to make a stand, no, cowardice prevailed.
Egyptians slaughtered some with whetted bronze
and took the rest alive to work as slaves.
But Zeus himself gave me a strategy—
I wish that he had not, had let me die
in Egypt, let me miss the grief to come.
I raised the well-wrought helmet off my head,
took shield from shoulders, dropped the spear I held,
and came upon a king aboard his chariot.
I kissed his knees and he took pity, spared me,
took me aboard and drove me, weeping, home.
His warrior legions rushed at me with spears,
infuriated, bent on taking life,
but he protected me, afraid of Zeus,
who takes offense when strangers are mistreated.
“For seven years I stayed, and I amassed
a fortune, given me by Egypt’s folk.
But when at length an eighth year rolled around,
there came a devious Phoenician man,
a swindler who had cheated many people,
and he led me—naive—until we reached
Phoenicia, where his home and chattels lay.
Throughout another year I stayed with him,
but when the days, the months, had come and gone,
completing every season of the year,
he took me on his vessel, bound for Libya,
to supervise his cargo, so he said.
In truth he planned to peddle me for profit,
which I suspected, but he made me go.
The vessel ran before a fine north breeze
along the shores of Crete, but Zeus planned ruin.
When we left Crete behind, we also left
the sight of land, saw only sky and sea.
The son of Cronus raised a purple cloud
above the ship; the sea below turned black.
Zeus thundered, casting bolts upon the craft.
She spun around from Zeus’s lightning strikes
and filled with sulphur fumes. The seamen jumped.
They bobbed about the darkened ship like gulls,
the god refusing them return to land.
But as for my grief-laden spirit, Zeus
conveyed to me the dark-prowed ship’s tall mast
in order that I might avoid more pain.
I clung to that and rode the howling winds
nine nights, nine days, till in the tenth dark night
a wave rolled me upon Thesprotia’s shore.
Thesprotian monarch Phidon was my host,
without reward. His cherished son found me,
subdued by toil and cold, and led me home.
He helped me stand and reach his father’s halls.
His father gave me clothing, cloak and tunic.
“While I was there, the monarch Phidon said
that he had hosted homeward-bound Odysseus.
He showed the wealth Odysseus had amassed:
the bronze, the gold ornately wrought, the iron,
enough to last and feed ten generations,
so much lay stored away in Phidon’s halls.
He said Odysseus headed for Dodona
to hear the high-crowned oak tell Zeus’s will
concerning how he might reach Ithaca,
concerning whether he should go disguised.
The king poured out libation, swore an oath
that as we spoke a vessel’s oarsmen waited
to take Odysseus to his fatherland.
But Phidon sent me off aboard a ship,
Thesprotian, bound for wheat-profuse Dulichion.
He bade the crew take me to King Acastus
forthwith, but they instead had wicked schemes
that would cause me more grief, more misery.
When we were far at sea, no land nearby,
they brought about my day of servitude.
They stripped away my clothing, cloak and tunic,
replaced them with this wretched, filthy garment—
the tattered clothing now before your eyes.
They reached distinctive Ithaca at dusk
and tied me up aboard the oar-fit ship
with rigging, twisted ropes. They disembarked,
prepared and quickly ate a meal ashore.
Meanwhile the gods themselves removed my bonds
with ease. My tattered cloak wrapped round my head,
I shinnied down the rudder till my chest
hit water. With both hands I paddled forward,
then swam until the men were far away.
I went ashore beside a flowery wood
and fell upon the ground. My shipmates howled
and raced about, but did not think it wise
to wander far, so soon they climbed aboard
their hollow ship. The heaven-dwellers hid
and guided me until I reached this farm,
since destiny ordains that I yet live.”
To answer that, swineherd Eumaeus said:
“Ah wretched stranger, how you stir my heart,
recounting tales of how you roamed and suffered.
But you misspoke, and I do not believe
your talk about Odysseus. Why did you
tell me falsehoods? How well I know about
my lord’s trip home, disdained by deathless gods.
They did not strike him down among the Trojans,
or let him fall in loyal comrades’ arms,
or else Achaeans would have raised a tomb
and afterward assured his son renown,
but no, the harpies snatched him up ignobly.
I live apart with pigs and never go
to town except the times Penelope
calls me because a message has arrived.
Then everyone would probe the messenger,
both those who grieve because they miss my lord
and those who take delight, who eat his wealth.
I never like to question men with news,
not after one Aetolian man misled me.
He killed a man and wandered countless lands
until he reached my home, where I received him.
He said on island Crete he saw Odysseus,
repairing ships that violent storms had smashed.
Odysseus said he would come home in summer,
together with his crew and boundless treasure.
Now you, old man, since gods have led you here,
you should not have told lies, sought to mislead.
Because you did, I owe you no respect,
just hospitality by Zeus’s will.”
Adroit Odysseus answered him, dissembling:
“Indeed, your chest contains a wary heart,
which even with my oath I failed to sway.
But come now, let us make a solemn pact
with witnesses: the gods who hold Olympus.
In case your master comes to this, your lodge,
escort me—dressed in clothing, tunic, cloak—
to where my heart desires to be: Dulichion.
But if your lord does not come as I say,
command your men to cast me off a cliff
so future beggars will avoid deceit.”
The staunch swineherd responded to his lord:
“If I did that, far-reaching infamy
would follow, soon and lasting ever after,
for me who took you in and hosted you,
only to murder you, destroy your life.
Much fervent prayer to Zeus would I then need.
Now it is dinnertime, and soon my men
will come inside to make a savory meal.”
As they were talking to each other so,
the herd of pigs arrived, drovers behind.
They steered the stock inside their usual sties
amid ungodly squeals the pigs unleashed.
The faithful swineherd shouted, called his aides:
“Select a boar to slay for this, our guest,
and let us eat as well, to salve fatigue
from years on end of tending white-tusked boars
while others loot and eat what we produce.”
That said, he split firewood with ruthless bronze.
The men led in a five-years-fattened hog
and stood him by the hearth. Eumaeus kept
the gods in mind—he strove to be upright—
and cast upon the fire selected bristles,
plucked from the boar. He prayed to deathless gods
that wise Odysseus would soon make it home.
He grasped a piece of oak and struck the beast.
His soul took flight. They cut his throat and singed him,
dismembered him. The swineherd placed meat bits—
a piece from every limb—on slabs of fat
bestrewed with meal and thrust those in the fire.
The meat still left they carved, impaled on spits,
then roasted, watchful, till each piece was cooked
and heaped atop a board. That done, the swineherd
stood to allot the meat, fair-minded always.
He separated seven equal portions,
one for the nymphs and Hermes, Maia’s son,
to whom he prayed, the rest for each man present.
He gave his honored guest the choice chine piece,
carved off the white-tusked boar, which pleased his lord
and prompted shrewd Odysseus to declare:
“I hope, Eumaeus, Zeus will favor you,
as you have me with honor such as this.”
Answering that, swineherd Eumaeus said:
“Uncommon stranger, eat, indulge yourself.
It is a god, not I, who grants or spurns
according to his whims, omnipotent.”
He burned the everlasting gods’ allotment,
libated, gave Odysseus sparkling wine,
and sat before the portion for himself.
Mesaulius passed out bread—the swineherd’s slave,
acquired while Ithaca’s lord was still away.
Odysseus’ wife or father played no part;
he made the purchase on his own from Taphians.
The diners reached to take the waiting treats,
and when desire to eat or drink was quelled,
Mesaulius took the food. The party slept
soon after, bellies filled with meat and bread.
At dark a storm came on, and Zeus poured rain
the whole night through; the wet west wind blew hard.
Odysseus spoke, a means to test the swineherd—
would he give up his cloak, or ask his help
to give one up, to shield the wandering guest?
“Hear me, Eumaeus, fellow comrades here,
as I must ask a boon. The wine begets
a lunacy, makes even wise men sing
and laugh at nothing. Wine engenders dance,
and draws forth words that should remain unsaid,
but having started, I will speak my mind.
I wish I had the strength and stamina
I had the day I led a raid on Troy.
The chiefs were Menelaus and Odysseus,
and they requested me to be a third.
When we drew near the city’s wall, its towers,
we found the area ringed by dense, low growth,
swamp grass and reeds. We dropped beneath the wall
and lay as stormy night came on: north winds,
bitterly cold, snow falling, icy snow
that froze on shields, its crystals ever thicker.
The other men had brought their cloaks and tunics.
They slept in peace with shoulders under shields,
but I had come away without my cloak,
unwise to think the weather would be mild.
I had but tunic, shield and leather apron.
Stars turned until a third of night remained
when I addressed Odysseus, next to me.
I elbowed him; he offered me an ear:
‘Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
I will not long retain my life. This cold
means death without a cloak. A god lured me
to come with tunic only. I am doomed.’
“He kept inside his thoughts about my plight,
as was his way in counsel or in war,
till speaking softly, he replied to me:
‘Be quiet or else you may be overheard!’
“Then, resting on an elbow, he spoke out:
‘Friends, hear the sacred dream that came tonight!
We lie too far from shore; someone should go
ask Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, our chief,
if he will post more men to join our mission.’
“At that, Andraemon’s son stood up, young Thoas.
He laid his cloak aside without delay
and raced off toward the ships. In his warm cloak
I slept, content, until the glow of Dawn.
If I were still as young, as strong as then,
a herder here might lend his cloak to me
to show a worthy man respect and friendship,
but you do not respect me, dressed in rags.”
Swineherd Eumaeus, you replied to him:
“Old man, you told the story very well
and spoke no word that was beside the point.
Tonight you will not lack for anything
a hard-pressed supplicant deserves to have.
Come dawn you will have only rags again,
since we do not have extra cloaks or tunics.
Indeed, we have just one of each per man.
But if Odysseus’ cherished son were here,
he would supply you clothes, a cloak, a tunic,
and escort you to where you want to go.”
That said, he bounded near the fire and made
a sleeping place with skins of goats and sheep.
His guest lay there; Eumaeus covered him.
He spread a heavy overcloak he kept
to wear whenever bitter cold should strike.
Odysseus soon dropped off to sleep. He slept,
as did the younger men, but not the swineherd.
He did not want to leave his pigs and rest,
so he prepared to go. Odysseus smiled
at such devotion to his absent master.
Eumaeus slung a sword across strong shoulders.
He drew around his back a heavy cloak,
on top of that a hide—a full-grown goat’s.
He grasped a spear, to fend off men or dogs,
then went outside to sleep with white-tusked boars
beneath a hollow rock that screened north wind.


Book 15

Meanwhile in Lacedaemon, Pallas Athena
sought out the brilliant son of bold Odysseus
to stir his memory, set him heading home.
She found Telemachus and Nestor’s son
in glorious Menelaus’ vestibule,
the latter youth subdued by gentle sleep,
but not Telemachus, since in his mind
concern about his father churned all night.
The bright-eyed goddess stood by him and spoke:
“No longer tarry here, Telemachus,
and leave your goods at home among those men,
those wanton curs, lest they consume it all,
destroy your wealth and make your journey vain.
You should persuade fierce Menelaus, straightway
to send you off so you can reach your mother.
By now her father, cousins, too, have said
to wed Eurymachus, who has surpassed
his fellow suitors with his courtship gifts.
Beware lest she denude your halls of wealth.
You know what kind of heart a woman has:
she would expand the wealth of him she marries,
but when it comes to sons, and wedded spouse
thought dead, no longer will she think of them.
When you get home, put everything in care
of one maidservant, one you trust completely,
till gods unveil for you an honored wife.
And here is something else that you should know:
well-chosen suitors lie in wait for you
in straits dividing Ithaca from Same.
They aim to kill you, not let you reach home,
but I proclaim the earth will sooner hold
the suitors who consume your livelihood.
So steer your vessel far from those two isles,
and sail by night. The gods who safeguard you
will send a helpful breeze from off your stern.
As soon as you set foot on Ithaca,
dispatch your ships and men to moor in port,
but you go straight inland to see the swineherd,
the loyal man who tends your droves of pigs.
Stay overnight. Next day send him to town,
a messenger to tell Penelope
that you have journeyed safely back from Pylos.”
That said, the goddess made for high Olympus.
Telemachus awakened Nestor’s son
by nudging with a foot, and spoke to him:
“Pisistratus, awake! A tough-hoofed team
must be put under yoke so we can travel!”
The son of Nestor, Pisistratus, said:
“Telemachus, we cannot cover ground
in gloom of night, and dawn will soon be here.
But wait till Menelaus, son of Atreus,
places his gifts aboard the chariot deck
and sends you off with friendly parting words.
Throughout his future days, a guest recalls
a man who hosted him and sealed a friendship.”
As he stopped speaking, gold-throned Dawn appeared
and warlike Menelaus soon approached,
risen from where he slept with fair-haired Helen.
Odysseus’ cherished son observed him coming.
He hastily put on a lustrous tunic,
and round his sturdy shoulders threw a cloak.
Godlike Odysseus’ warrior son passed through
the gates, stood near the Spartan king and said:
“Atrides, Menelaus, chief of armies,
sir, send me off to reach my fatherland.
My heart desires return, to go back home.”
In answer, warlike Menelaus said:
“I will not keep you long, Telemachus,
from going home. I lack respect for hosts
who either entertain too lavishly
or slight their guests. I take a balanced course:
do not send off a guest who wants to stay,
and do not keep a guest who wants to go.
Befriend the guest, but let him go at will.
Now wait till I bring gifts for you to take,
beautiful gifts, and I will tell the maids
to get a feast prepared within my halls.
For you there will be pleasure, honor, glory,
feasting before you travel boundless earth.
If you would survey Hellas, central Argos,
why, I will yoke a team, escort you there,
show you the towns men hold, and not a man
will turn us back, no, each will add a gift,
perhaps a bright bronze tripod, else a kettle,
a pair of mules, or yet a golden cup.”
Telemachus was ready to respond:
“Captain of armies, Zeus-sprung Menelaus,
I need to go straight home. When I sailed here,
I did not leave a man to guard my chattels.
I must protect myself while seeking Father.
I do not want my wealth at home consumed.”
As soon as warlike Menelaus heard,
he straightway told his wife and servant maids
to draw upon his stores and lay a feast.
Boëthous’ son Eteoneus arrived,
just risen up from where he slept nearby.
The monarch told the youth to light a fire
for roasting meat, and he did not refuse.
Lord Menelaus entered his great hall,
son Megapenthes close behind with Helen,
and when they came to where his treasure lay,
the son of Atreus grasped a loving cup,
told Megapenthes he should bring a bowl,
a silver krater. Helen showed a chest
in which lay lovely robes she made herself.
The fabled woman chose and lifted one—
the largest, most elaborately embroidered,
luminous like a star—the bottom-most robe.
The three went through the palace till they found
Telemachus, and Menelaus said:
“Young man, since you are bent on going home,
may Zeus assist you, Hera’s thundering husband.
Of all the gifts that lie stored in my halls,
to you I give the loveliest, most precious.
Yours is this hammered bowl of solid silver,
unmixed and pure, except its rim of gold,
Hephaestus’ work, my gift from Phaedimus,
Sidonian king whose halls protected me
when I stopped there. I pass it on to you.”
The son of Atreus handed him the cup,
with handles on both sides, and Megapenthes
set down before the youth the gleaming bowl—
pure silver. Fair-cheeked Helen stood nearby,
the robe in hand, and spoke a word to him:
“And I, dear child, I give you this product
of Helen’s hands intended for your wedding,
the bridal gown. Till then let your sweet mother
keep it for you. I hope you safely reach
your fatherland, your strong-constructed halls.”
She handed him the robe; he took it gladly.
Brave Pisistratus loaded, packed the gifts
aboard the chariot deck, amazed at each.
Blond Menelaus ushered them inside
and bade them take a seat on chair or couch.
A maid decanted water, tilting a flask—
pure gold—above a solid silver basin
to wash their hands. She placed by them a table,
on which the pantry mistress laid out bread
and various foods that she was proud to serve,
while Eteoneus carved, apportioned meat,
and glorious Menelaus’ son poured wine.
The diners reached to take the readied fare,
and with desire for food or drink dispatched,
Telemachus and Nestor’s sturdy son
yoked up their horses, climbed aboard the chariot
and drove them through the courtyard, out the gates.
The son of Atreus, Menelaus, followed.
His right hand carried hearty, honeyed wine,
a full gold cup, to libate their departure.
He stood beside the team and bade farewell:
“I wish you luck, and pass my warm regards
to Nestor, who was like my father, kind,
when we Achaean sons waged war at Troy.”
The youth faced Menelaus and declared:
“Exactly as you ask, Zeus-sprung, to him
I will repeat your words. I hope that I
will find Odysseus back in Ithaca
so I can tell him how you hosted me
when I came here, and show your wondrous gifts.”
While thus he spoke, a bird flew on his right,
an eagle, claws around a snow-white goose,
a farmyard bird. Observers raised a shout,
the men and women there, as he flew near.
He reached the team and darted east. The people
laughed and relaxed, the heart in each now soothed,
but Pisistratus was the first to speak:
“Tell, Zeus-sprung Menelaus, chief of armies,
whether the omen speaks to you or us!”
War-loving Menelaus pondered hard
how to discern, describe the omen’s meaning,
but long-robed Helen spoke before he did:
“Hear me, and I will prophesy what gods
suggest to me, which I think will come true.
Just as the eagle seized that home-bred goose,
swooped from his craggy mountain breeding grounds,
so after countless roves and trials Odysseus,
if not already there, will reach his home,
devising dismal doom for every suitor.”
Selemachus stood facing her and spoke:
“May Hera’s thunderous husband make it so,
and I will pray to you as to a goddess.”
Se whipped the team. Without a pause, the horses
eagerly raced through town onto the plain,
where through the day they pressed the yoke ahead
until the sun went down, the way grew dark.
The youths reached Phera, home of Diocles,
son of Ortilochus—begot by Alpheus—
and there they passed the night, well entertained.
When early-rising rosy Dawn appeared,
they yoked the horses, climbed aboard the chariot,
drove clattering through the courtyard, out the gates.
The horses felt the lash, they gladly flew,
and when they neared the citadel of Pylos,
Telemachus addressed the son of Nestor:
“Would you make me a promise, Pisistratus,
and keep it? Friends forever we shall be,
thanks to our equal years, our fathers’ bond,
and now this journey welding hearts together.
Do not drive past my ship, no, leave me there,
else Nestor may delay my embarkation
to show me friendship. I must sail at once.”
The son of Nestor pondered, searched his heart,
whether to make the promise asked of him,
and on consideration thought it best
to wheel the team toward the shore and ship.
Aboard the stern he set the splendid gifts,
the gold and clothing Menelaus gave.
He urgently addressed Telemachus:
“Board right away, bid sailors climb aboard,
before I make it home and tell the old man.
My heart and mind know very well indeed
his stubborn will—he would not let you sail.
He would come here and, knowing him, I doubt
he would go home without your company.”
Saving said that, he lashed the flax-maned team
and soon arrived at home in Pylos’ city.
Telemachus aroused his crew and ordered:
“Carefully stow these gifts below our decks.
Remain aboard, ready to sail our course.”
Shey heard him well. They followed his commands
and soon were seated, each man at his tholes.
Telemachus was praying to Athena
beside the stern when near him came a man,
a fugitive from Argos, where he killed
a prophet who possessed Melampus’ lineage.
Melampus made his home in goat-rich Pylos,
a wealthy man with Pylos’ grandest halls,
but later left his fatherland and fled.
Old Neleus, most admired of men then living,
preserved Melampus’ wealth throughout the year
he was a prisoner of Phylacus,
tied up in powerful bonds, and suffering pain
for love of Neleus’ daughter, blind desire
avenging Furies forced into his mind,
till he escaped and herded Neleus’ cows
from Phylace to Pylos, paid the price
that Neleus set, and carried off his daughter
to be Melampus’ brother’s wife. Melampus
moved on to Argos fields, his destined place
to live, and there he ruled the legion Argives,
constructed high-roofed halls and took a wife
who bore him sons Antiphates and Mantius.
Antiphates was sire to Oïcles,
and Oïcles begat Amphiaraus,
whom Zeus and Zeus’s son Apollo loved,
though he did not survive to reach old age,
but died at Thebes, corrupted wife to blame.
He left two sons, Amphilochus and Alcmaeon.
Mantius fathered Clitus and Polyphides,
but gold-throned Dawn one day abducted Clitus
to live among the gods, so fair was he.
Apollo made a seer of Polyphides,
the finest when Amphiaraus died.
He spurned his sire and moved to Hyperesia,
where he resided, prophet for all mortals.
It was his son, named Theoclymenus,
who stood beside Telemachus as he
libated, praying at his fast dark ship.
The prophet interrupted him and said:
“My friend, whom I find sacrificing here,
now, by your victim, by the god you pray to,
and by your comrades’ lives, and by your own,
answer me honestly, keep nothing hidden:
Who are your folk? Where are your town and parents?”
Telemachus addressed the man and said:
“Stranger, I will respond and tell the truth.
I come from Ithaca, Odysseus’ son,
but he may now have died a wretched death.
Therefore, I took this dark-hulled ship, these men,
and came to ask about my long-gone sire.”
Theoclymenus, a godlike man, replied:
“I left my homeland when I killed a man,
a fellow tribesman who has many kin
and rules Achaeans everywhere in Argos.
In order to escape from them, from death,
I flee—my lot to roam midst mortal men.
Take me aboard your ship, I beg of you,
else they will chase me down and slaughter me.”
Telemachus in turn addressed the seer:
“I will not spurn you, you may come aboard,
so take a seat and share what cheer we have.”
That said, he took his guest’s bronze-pointed spear
and laid it on the crescent vessel’s deck.
He climbed aboard the sea-traversing craft
and sat toward the stern, while right beside
sat Theoclymenus. The hawsers loosed,
Telemachus exhorted, told his men
to set the rigging, which they quickly did.
They raised and stood the piney mast midships,
fixed in the keel, then tied the forestays fast.
They hauled the sail aloft with oxhide thongs.
Bright-eyed Athena sent a welcome wind,
streamed through the ether, so with utmost speed
the ship could make its run across the waves,
passing the Crounoi, passing Chalcis’ streams.
The sun went down, the way grew shadowy,
but under Zeus’s wind the ship reached Pheae
and passed by Elis, where Epeans rule,
past many islands flitting one by one.
Telemachus wondered, would he live or die?
Meanwhile Odysseus, at the swineherd’s hut,
sat eating with the hungry livestock herders.
After they quelled desire for food and drink,
Odysseus spoke, used words to test the swineherd,
whether the man, steadfast, would host him longer,
within his farmstead, or send him away.
“Listen, Eumaeus, listen, worthy herders!
Come dawn I plan to leave here, go to town
and beg, so I will not deplete your stores.
Suggest an honest guide to walk with me,
to lead me there. In town, when left alone,
I will meander, beg for bread and water.
If I should find divine Odysseus’ house,
I might have news to tell Penelope,
or else I may approach the haughty suitors
in hopes they might share food, if only scraps.
A servant I could be, if one would have me,
for let me tell you something you should heed:
by grace of Hermes—runner who imparts
to works of mortal men delight and splendor—
no man alive can rival me at service,
whether it be to split and stack firewood,
to set a banquet, cook, or pour the wine—
the tasks that servants do for noble men.”
Perplexed, swineherd Eumaeus, you replied:
“Ah stranger, why do you let thoughts like that
be on your mind? You only court your doom
if you desire to go among those suitors,
whose prideful violence may soil heaven’s gates.
There is no one like you among their servants,
who are still young, attired in cloaks and tunics.
Their heads are always sleek, their faces clean,
the men who serve the wooers. Their tabletops
are overfilled with meat and grain and wine.
You should stay here. Not one of us objects,
not I, not any man among my comrades.
But when Odysseus’ cherished son arrives,
he will attire you—clothing, tunic, cloak—
and send you where your heart desires to be.”
Unshakable Odysseus answered him:
“Eumaeus, would that father Zeus will love you
as I do: you who stopped my grievous roving.
For mortals there is nothing worse than rambling,
but hunger forces us to roam and suffer,
we men on whom the curse of roving falls.
Now, since you bid me stay, await the youth,
tell me about divine Odysseus’ mother,
his father—both near old age when he left.
Do they yet live beneath the sun’s bright rays,
or have they died and entered Hades’ realm?”
To that, Eumaeus, chief swineherd, declared:
“All right then, guest, I will relate the truth.
Laertes lives, forever praying Zeus
to let his soul escape his limbs at home
because he pines so for his son’s return
and for his once-illustrious wedded wife
whose early death suffused his back with age.
She died from grief, grief for her glorious son,
a wretched death, which I would not desire
for any comrade here, for any friend.
While yet she was alive, although she grieved,
I loved to talk with her, learn of her youth.
She raised me right by long-robed Ctimene,
her lovely girl, the youngest child she bore,
and I grew up with her, esteemed no less,
until the bloom of youth came on us both.
They granted Ctimene to wed in Same.
The lady gave me clothing, cloak and tunic,
a pair of sandals, finery of all sorts,
and sent me here. She always favored me.
I lack such things today, but nonetheless
the blessed gods have swelled the herds I keep,
which lets me eat and drink and favor others.
However, nothing comes forth from the queen,
no word, no deed, since evil took her house—
arrogant men. The serving people long
to see their lady, talk and ask her questions,
to eat with her, to carry bits of food
home to the country—luxuries servants crave.”
Wily Odysseus answered him and said:
“How sad, swineherd Eumaeus, since childhood
you wandered far from fatherland and parents,
but come now, tell me, answer truthfully,
whether a town of avenues was sacked,
a city where your sire and mother lived,
or were you herding sheep or goats alone
when hostile men kidnapped you, brought you here
and sold you to your master as a servant?”
In turn, the chief of swineherds answered him:
“Since you inquire about these matters, guest,
listen in peace, in pleasure, drink some wine
and sit. The timeless night is made for sleep,
also for hearing tales. You have no need
of sleep till tired, and too much sleep is bad.
If any of my helpers so desires,
let him go out and sleep till dawn appears,
then eat, and tend the master’s herd of swine.
We two shall feast and drink inside this hut,
amuse ourselves with one another’s woes.
One’s trials can entertain in retrospect,
though at the time he suffered, wandered far.
So I will tell you what you asked of me.
“There is an island, Syria, you may know,
above Ortygia, where the sun turns round.
It has few people but is well endowed
with pasture, cattle, wheat and grapes for wine.
There is no hunger there, nor any form
of blight such as so often falls on mortals.
In time, when members of the clans grow old,
Apollo with his silver bow arrives,
or Artemis, and gentle arrows slay.
The people there are split between two towns;
my father ruled the folk in both as king.
He was Ormenus’ godlike son, Ctesius.
“One day Phoenicians—famous sailors—came,
deceitful men, their vessel filled with trinkets.
My father kept a lone Phoenician girl,
beautiful, tall and skilled at dazzling works.
A honey-tongued Phoenician man seduced her.
He found her washing clothes beside their ship
and lay with her in rapture such as wins
a woman’s heart however staunch she be.
He later asked her where she had been raised,
and she described her father’s high-roofed halls:
‘I pride myself to be from bronze-rich Sidon,
daughter of Arybas, a wealthy man,
but one day Taphian raiders kidnapped me
as I came in from fieldwork, brought me here
and sold me to a man who paid them well.’
“The man who had seduced her said to her:
‘Well, would you go with us, go home again?
There you will see your parents’ high-roofed halls
and see your parents, still alive, still rich.’
“The woman answered him, declaring thus:
‘I might, but only if you mariners
will swear an oath to take me home untouched.’
“The seamen swore the oath that she proposed,
and after they had pledged their solemn vow,
the woman spoke to them, described her plan:
‘Keep silent now, and do not speak of me
among yourselves while meeting on the street
or at the spring, lest someone overhear
and tell the old king. He would bind me fast
in sturdy bonds and engineer your deaths.
Complete your trades, but keep our talk a secret,
and when your ship is filled with bartered goods,
straightway dispatch a messenger to me.
I will bring gold to you, what I can carry,
and even something more to pay my way:
my mighty master’s son is in my care.
He often passes with me out the gates,
and I will bring him too. A handsome price
will he command when sold to foreign men.’
“With that, she turned back to her master’s palace.
The businesslike Phoenicians stayed a year
and filled their vessel’s holds with heaps of goods.
After the loaded craft was set to sail,
they sent a man to let the woman know,
an able man who brought to Father’s halls
a golden necklace strung with amber beads.
My mother, joined by maids about the house,
fingered the beads, considered what to pay.
Meantime the courier nodded to the woman
and quietly made his way back to the ship.
The woman took my hand and led me out,
but at the entryway she stole utensils
left there by men my father called away
to join a council where the people met.
She hid three cups within her garments’ folds
and brought them while I followed mindlessly.
The sun went down, and soon the ways grew dark,
but, walking fast, we reached the sheltered cove
in which Phoenician sailors moored their ship.
They put to sea and sailed a watery course
with us aboard, sped by a breeze from Zeus.
Six days we sailed, the six long nights as well.
When Cronus’ son brought on a seventh day,
Artemis drew her arrows, slew the girl.
She fell in bilge the way a seagull drops;
the sailors cast her overboard as food
for fish or seals while I was left to grieve.
Water and wind took them to Ithaca;
Laertes bought me here—he ransomed me—
and that is how my eyes first saw this land.”
To that, Zeus-sprung Odysseus voiced reply:
“Eumaeus, you have surely stirred my heart
by telling me the hardships you sustained.
At least Zeus mingled with your ills some good.
You wound up serving in the halls of one
who kindly saw that you had food and drink.
You always led a decent life, but I
have wandered towns of men till I reached here.”
In such a way they spoke to one another,
and barely closed their eyes in brief respite
before Dawn’s gold appeared. Down near the shore
Telemachus’ men took down the sail and mast.
They rowed ahead until they reached a place
to drop the mooring stones made fast astern.
They disembarked upon the water’s rim,
prepared a meal and mixed full bowls of wine.
After they quelled desire for food and drink,
Telemachus was first to speak a word:
“Men, row the dusky vessel toward the city
while I inspect the countryside, my fields,
till evening, when I shall come into town.
Tomorrow I will compensate your toil
with honeyed wine and meat-filled banquet table.”
But godlike Theoclymenus spoke up:
“Dear lad, where would you have me go? The home
of one with sway in Ithaca, a suitor?
Or straight into your mother’s halls—and yours?”
Alert Telemachus faced him and said:
“Another time I would say to our halls,
where you would not lack warmth, but now I fear
the risk with me away. Mother I doubt
will let you see her. She avoids the suitors.
She stays apart and plies her loom upstairs.
I say the man you ought to go to is
Polybus’ glorious son Eurymachus,
whom Ithacans suppose to be a god.
He is the best among the men who want
to wed my mother, seize Odysseus’ honor.
Still, only ether-dwelling Zeus can know
if vengeance day will dawn before a wedding.”
St that, a bird flew by toward the east,
a hawk, Apollo’s messenger, its claws
clutched round a dove whose feathers fell to earth
between Telemachus and his moored ship.
Theoclymenus then drew the youth aside,
compressed his hand, pronounced his name and said:
“That bird did not fly unconstrained by gods.
I knew it as an omen on first sight.
There is no race of kings as fit as yours
in Ithaca, and yours will rule forever.”
Selemachus looked in his eyes and said:
“Stranger, if what you say should come to pass,
the many friendship gifts you shall receive
will cause the folk you meet to call you blest.”
Se told his aide Piraeus, Clytius’ son:
“Piraeus, more than any other man
who followed me to Pylos, you were faithful.
Take Theoclymenus home with you as guest
and show him honor, friendship, till I come.”
In turn, spear-famed Piraeus said to him:
“Regardless of how long you stay away,
I will take care that he shall want for nothing.”
Piraeus boarded ship. He bade the crew
to hasten on and cast the hawsers off.
They came aboard apace and sat at tholes.
Telemachus tied sandals neath his feet
and lifted off the deck a spear with point
of whetted bronze. The men untied the ropes,
shoved off and rowed toward town as he had bade,
Odysseus’ cherished son Telemachus.
His feet bore him up to his rich farmstead,
where there were countless pigs near which their drover,
devoted to his lord, was sleeping still.


Book 16

Inside his hut, the swineherd and Odysseus
kindled a fire for breakfast after dawn.
Eumaeus sent his aides to tend the hogs.
Telemachus approached; the watchdogs wagged
their tails at him. Divine Odysseus saw
the playful dogs and heard advancing footfalls.
Straightway he told Eumaeus what he noticed:
“A friend of yours, Eumaeus, has arrived,
known well enough so that no dog has barked.
They wag their tails despite footsteps I heard.”
He barely spoke before his cherished son
stood at the door. The swineherd gasped, amazed,
so much so that he dropped the bowls in which
he had been mixing wine. He faced the youth,
he kissed his head, kissed both his comely eyes,
kissed both his hands. He let a warm tear fall.
As when a father sees his best-loved child
arriving home from ten long years abroad,
his only son whom he has sorely missed,
so did the swineherd clasp Telemachus,
kiss him as if he had returned from death.
He wept for joy but spoke despite his tears:
“You came, Telemachus! I thought to see you
never again once you had sailed for Pylos!
Do come inside, dear boy, so that my heart
can feel the joy of seeing you anew.
You rarely came here to these wilds and fields.
You stayed in town perhaps because you wished
to keep an eye on those licentious suitors.”
Slert Telemachus addressed the man:
“Just as you wish, dear sir. I journeyed here
to visit you and hear what you would say:
is Mother still at home, or is she now
remarried, gone and left Odysseus’ bed
unoccupied except for spider webs.”
So that, Odysseus’ chief swineherd replied:
“She still is there, all right, though sick at heart.
Inside your halls she mourns without surcease.
She pines, her tears cascade both day and night.”
Having said that, he took the youth’s bronze spear.
Telemachus stepped across the stone threshold.
Odysseus left his seat respectfully.
Telemachus likewise deferred and said:
“Sit, stranger! There will be another seat
for me. The man behind me will prepare it.”
Odysseus took his seat again; his host
spread out green branches, placed a fleece above,
and there Odysseus’ worthy son sat down.
Eumaeus set beside them meats on trays,
well-roasted for an earlier meal and saved.
He swiftly heaped some baskets high with bread
and blended wine in bowls of ivy wood,
then took his seat, which faced divine Odysseus.
Their hands reached out and took the readied treats.
After they quelled desire for food and drink,
Telemachus addressed the loyal swineherd:
“From where did this guest come? How did his crew
find Ithaca? Who does he claim they are?
I do not think he made it here on foot.”
Swineherd Eumaeus answered and declared:
“All right, my boy, I will tell what I know.
He claims his stock to be from spacious Crete,
and says he has seen countless mortals’ towns,
roaming—his destiny a god ordained.
He fled a ship sailed by Thesprotian men
and wandered here. I grant the man to you,
to be your suppliant. Do as you wish.”
Astute Telemachus addressed his swineherd:
“What you propose, Eumaeus, stings my heart.
How could I host the stranger in my halls?
I am a youth and do not trust my hands
to ward away a man who might attack.
My mother frets, her heart cannot resolve
whether to stand by me and mind our home,
respect her husband’s bed, the people’s will,
or leave with some Achaean man, the best
of those who woo her, offering bridal gifts.
But since this stranger came to your abode,
let him be dressed in clothing, cloak and tunic.
I will provide a two-edged sword, two sandals,
and send him where his heart bids him to be.
If you desire, you may let him stay here,
and I will send the garments, also food
for him to eat, lest he deplete your stores.
But I would not allow the man to go
among the suitors, wanton as they are.
They might deride him, causing me distress.
It would be hard for one to stop so many,
however brave he were; their throng is mighty.”
Long-suffering Odysseus spoke to that:
“Ah friend, I trust that custom lets me speak,
so pained am I at heart to hear about
the wanton acts you say the suitors plot
within the halls of such a man as you.
Do you wish to submit? Or do the folk
in town detest you, urged on by some god?
Or do you blame your kin, on whom a man
relies to fight when violent conflict looms?
If only I had youth to match my spirit,
and were Odysseus or Odysseus’ son,
my wandering here would be a cause for hope.
I would desire a suitor to behead me
unless I caused the doom of all the men
who plague Laertes’ son Odysseus’ halls,
and if by dint of numbers they prevailed,
I would prefer to be cut down at home
than live to witness more of their misdeeds:
abusing guests and household servant maids—
manhandling them throughout the splendid palace—
consuming stored-up wine, the food as well,
debauched, depraved, achieving nothing good.”
Adroit Telemachus looked up and said:
“Well, stranger, I will frankly answer you.
The people do not hate or rail at me,
nor does blame lie with kinfolk, those a man
must trust to fight when deadly conflict looms.
The son of Cronus limited our breed.
Arcesius had a single son, Laertes.
Laertes had a single son, Odysseus,
and he sired only me before he sailed.
Now legion hostile men beset my halls,
the chiefs who rule the islands round about—
wooded Zacynthus, Same, Dulichion—
as well as those with power in Ithaca.
They daily court my mother, waste our wealth.
She will not rule a marriage out, a means
to settle matters, so they eat away
my goods, and soon they will destroy me too.
These matters, though, repose in laps of gods.
Eumaeus, visit shrewd Penelope
and tell her I am safely back from Pylos.
I must remain apart while you go there
and speak for me. Let them not overhear,
the men who would conspire to bring me down.”
Swineherd Eumaeus, you replied to him:
“I understand what you have bade me do,
but think on this and speak without restraint:
while I am out, should I inform Laertes?
Although he deeply grieved and missed Odysseus,
he tended to his work, his home and servants.
He ate and drank whenever he desired.
But now, beginning when you sailed for Pylos,
they say that he no longer eats or drinks,
no longer tends his tasks. He only sits
and groans while flesh atop his bones is shriveling.”
Astute Telemachus addressed Eumaeus:
“A shame, but we shall sadly let him be.
If we could have our every wish fulfilled,
we first would choose to have my father home.
Your message given, come back here. Do not
seek out Laertes. Tell my mother, though,
to send her head handmaid with utmost speed
to tell the aged man that I am back.”
That galvanized the swineherd. He took sandals,
tied them beneath his feet and sped to town.
Athena did not fail to see him go,
and she came near the hut, in form a woman,
beautiful, tall and skilled at handicrafts.
She stood outside the door. Odysseus saw her.
His son did not and could not see the goddess.
The gods do not appear to everyone.
Odysseus saw her well, as did the dogs
who cowered terrified across the farmyard.
She raised a brow; Odysseus knew her then
and hurried out beside the courtyard’s wall.
He stood before her till the goddess said:
“Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
now is the time to make your son aware
so that you two can plan the suitors’ doom
and venture into town, where I myself
will soon be with you. I am primed to fight.”
With that, Athena waved her golden wand.
To start, she wrapped a laundered cloak and tunic
around his chest. She swelled his bulk, gave youth,
restored his skin’s dark hue, filled out his cheeks
and grew a jet black beard about his jaws.
That done, she disappeared. Odysseus, though,
walked in the hut. His son was thunderstruck
and turned away, afraid a god was there.
He quickly found his voice and spoke a word:
“You look far different, stranger, younger now.
Your skin has changed, and you have decent clothes.
You must be one of those who hold the heavens!
Be kind! We will prepare a sacrifice
and offer gifts of gold, but spare our lives!”
Perdurable Odysseus answered him:
“No god am I. Why do you say I am?
I am your sire, on whose account you grieve
while suffering under sway of violent rogues.”
So saying, he kissed his son, and down his cheek
a tear, suppressed till then, rolled toward the earth.
Telemachus did not believe his father,
and in response the youth declared to him:
“You cannot be Odysseus, rather a god
who wants to fool me, aggravate my grief.
No mortal man could change in such a way
unless a deathless god had intervened,
resolved to make you young instead of old.
You recently were aged, dressed in rags.
You now look like the gods who hold the heavens!”
Answering him, astute Odysseus said:
“Telemachus, your father’s presence here
should not be cause for you to disbelieve.
There is but one Odysseus to return,
and I am he. I suffered, roaming far,
till after twenty years I made it home.
The changes in me were Athena’s work.
She has the skill to make me how she wants,
one time in beggar’s form, another time
a younger man now dressed in comely clothes.
Easy it is for those who hold the skies
to glorify a man or tarnish him.”
That said, he sat, and young Telemachus
embraced his noble father, shedding tears.
Desire to weep stirred deep in both their hearts,
and weep they did, their cries more shrill than birds—
ospreys or hook-clawed vultures, birds whose young
the country folk have seized while yet unfledged.
So pitiably they wept and tears gushed forth.
The sun would have gone down while they still wept
had not Telemachus addressed his sire:
“Father, what sort of ship did seamen sail
to bring you here? What people were they from?
I do not think you could have come on foot.”
Long-suffering Odysseus answered him:
“I will tell you the truth about that, son.
Sea-famed Phaeacians brought me. They transport
whatever men may light upon their shores.
I slept throughout their voyage across the seas,
till they set me in Ithaca with gifts
of bronze and gold and heaps of woven clothes,
now well concealed in caves by heaven’s will.
Athena counseled me to travel here
so as to plan the malefactors’ doom.
Now tally up and name for me the suitors,
how many men, and of what quality.
Then after soul-search I will gauge the task,
declare if we two are enough to take them
without assistance, or if we need allies.”
Slert Telemachus in turn averred:
“Ah Father, I have heard about your fame—
your hands, your spearmanship, your wise advice—
but now your words amaze. There is no way
for two to fight so many mighty men.
There are not merely ten or twenty suitors,
no, they are legion, as you now shall learn.
From isle Dulichion there are fifty-two
selected youths, attended by six servants.
From Same there are twenty-four contenders,
and from Zacynthus there are twenty more.
From Ithaca a dozen, high-born men.
There are, as well, a bard, the herald Medon
and two attendants skilled at carving meat.
If we two went against their legion numbers,
the vengeance you desire would come to naught.
So you must give some thought to who will help,
who you believe might firmly back us up.”
So that, Odysseus answered and inquired:
“Well, let me put a question back to you:
what if Athena, father Zeus as well,
protect us? Should I think of more assistance?”
Telemachus, astonished, answered him:
“You name a pair of more than worthy allies,
who dwell on high, above the clouds, supreme,
and rule the deathless gods and mortal men.”
Steadfast, unshakable Odysseus said:
“Those two will not for long remain aloof
from deadly strife, the day when you and I
unleash the might of Ares in our halls.
At dawn’s first light tomorrow you should go,
head home and mingle with the strutting suitors.
Later the swineherd will lead me to town,
in form again a wretched, aged beggar.
If suitors treat me ill, your heart must keep
in check despite my pain, my misery,
and even if they drag me by the foot,
throw stones at me, you merely watch, restrained.
You may ask them to mistreat me no longer,
persuade them if you can. Not one of them
will heed, but soon their reckoning day will come.
And let me tell you this to keep in mind.
When my mentor Athena signals me,
I will incline my head. When you see that,
collect the arms and armor from the halls
and place them in the farthest upper room.
Take almost all. Use honeyed words to fool
the suitors when asked why you moved the arms:
‘To safeguard them from smoke. They are unlike
they were the day Odysseus left for Troy.
The smoke from each day’s fire increased the soot.
Also, the son of Cronus cautioned me
that you might fight among yourselves while drunk,
might wound yourselves and compromise your feasts,
your courting. Iron entices men to fight.’
Retain for us two swords and two sharp spears—
also a pair of hand-held oxhide shields—
where we can dash and grab them while our foes
are under Zeus’s spell, Athena’s magic.
Now I will tell you something else to mull:
if you are truly mine and share my blood,
let no one know Odysseus has returned,
not old Laertes, not the loyal swineherd,
not any servant, not Penelope.
We two will learn the handmaids’ loyalties
and put each servant man on trial to learn
which ones have hearts that fear and honor us,
and which of them has no respect for you.”
His glorious son replied and disagreed:
“Father, you will, I think, soon come to know
my heart, which holds no lack of firm resolve,
but I think what you said will never work
for us, so I now beg you reconsider.
Much time would be required to test them all.
Meanwhile the suitors in our halls sit back,
imperiously, and waste our wealth away.
So I suggest you learn about the maids,
whether they have been true or traitorous,
but not the men who work upon our farms.
No, later on will be the time for them,
when aegis-keeping Zeus gives you the sign.”
While son and father talked in such a vein,
the ship drew near the town of Ithaca,
the ship that brought Telemachus from Pylos,
and when the sailors reached the fathomless bay,
they dragged the dusky vessel onto shore.
After they stowed the rigging, spirits high,
they took the trove of gifts to Clytius.
They then dispatched a herald to the palace
to make alert Penelope aware
her son had come ashore and bade the ship
sail on to town lest she might fear for him,
the virtuous queen, and needlessly shed tears.
The herald met the swineherd face to face,
both men with messages to tell one lady,
and when they reached the hallowed monarch’s halls,
the herald spoke within earshot of maids:
“My queen, your son is back in Ithaca.”
The swineherd spoke where none could hear a word.
He told her what her son had bade him say,
and after he completed his address
he left the halls, retreated to the hogs.
The suitors were displeased by what they learned.
They went outside, walked toward the courtyard wall
and took up seats outside its open gates.
Among the group, Eurymachus spoke first:
“Ah friends, a great misfortune has occurred:
Telemachus returned, against my plan.
Let us now launch the best ship we can find,
with able seamen who can quickly row
and tell our ambuscade to come home fast.”
Just then Amphinomus descried a ship
afloat above the bay’s unfathomed depths,
its sail hauled down, its seamen rowing hard.
He laughed aloud and let his comrades know:
“We need not send them word; I see them there!
Perhaps a god informed them, or they saw
Telemachus’ ship pass but could not seize it.”
That said, they stood and walked along the sea
to where the sailors dragged their ship ashore
and willing aides unloaded arms and armor.
The suitors met in private conclave, barred
admittance to outsiders young and old.
Eupeithes’ son Eurymachus addressed them:
“The gods saw fit to let the youth escape.
By day the men kept watch from windswept crags,
positioned well, and when the sun went down,
we never slept on land. No, on the waves
we lurked aboard our ship awaiting Dawn,
that we might seize and kill Telemachus,
but while we lurked, a god was guiding him.
We must plan, here and now, a forceful death
for him with no escape. I do not think
our aims will be fulfilled with him alive.
He is a skillful thinker, good in council,
and people do not bear goodwill toward us.
Now is our time—before he calls the men
to congregate. He will not long delay
before he stands among them to describe
how heaven foiled our planned assassination.
The men will not approve of what we did,
and they may punish us, or even drive us
out of our lands to those of foreign folk.
So we should kill him in the lonely fields,
or on a road, and seize his properties
to split among ourselves—all but his halls,
which are to be his mother’s and her groom’s.
But if my plan displeases you—you wish
to let him live and keep his property—
we ought no longer to consume his wealth
when gathering here. Instead each man should woo
with gifts he brings from his domain, and she
will wed who brings the most, as is the custom.”
The audience sat silently until
a man among them stood, Amphinomus—
the glorious son of Nisus, Aretias’ son—
from wheat-rich, grass-endowed Dulichion,
the suitor who most pleased Penelope
with speech that showed he had a noble heart.
Amphinomus now spoke well-meaning words:
“Friends, I do not desire to kill the lad,
Telemachus, for it is wrong to end
a royal strain without the gods’ assent.
But if almighty Zeus decrees approval,
then I would kill the boy and urge you to,
but if the gods refuse, I bid you stop.”
Smphinomus’ oration won them over.
They rose and set out toward Odysseus’ halls
and sat on polished chairs when they arrived.
Meanwhile Penelope devised a plan
to show herself among the arrogant suitors.
She learned that they had planned her son’s demise—
her herald Medon overheard them plotting.
She went down to the great hall, maids in tow,
and when she reached the suitors, like a goddess,
she stood beside a roof-supporting column.
She held a shining veil across her cheeks
and singled out Antinous to chide:
“Antinous, although they say that you
excel among the Ithacans your age
in speech and wisdom, you in truth do not.
Why would you plan to kill Telemachus
and disregard a supplicant whom Zeus
would nurture? Wrong it is to plot against him.
Your father once came here in flight, you know,
fearing his people, who became incensed
because he joined the looting Taphian pirates,
raiding Thesprotians whom the people loved.
The folk were of a mind to slaughter him
and redistribute all that he possessed.
Odysseus guarded him from them, their fury.
Now you consume his chattels, woo his wife
and would cut down his son. You torment me.
I ask that you and your comrades desist!”
Polybus’ son Eurymachus declared:
“Icarius’ daughter, shrewd Penelope,
take heart! Have no concern about your son!
The man does not exist, has not been born,
who will lay hands upon Telemachus
while I remain alive and see the earth!
I so assert, and so shall matters be.
The blood of him who tries will wet my spear.
His sire, Odysseus, plunderer of cities,
so many times sat me upon his lap
and gave me meat and offered ruddy wine.
Therefore I love the lad Telemachus,
and I say he should have no fear of death
from suitors’ hands, although from gods’ he may.”
He plotted death despite the words he spoke.
Penelope ascended to her rooms
and mourned her lord Odysseus till Athena
showered gentle sleep upon her eyelids.
The swineherd neared Odysseus and his son
as they prepared their evening meal and stood
above a hog they sacrificed. Athena
earlier touched Laertes’ son Odysseus,
her wand in hand, and made him old again,
attired in wretched garments, lest the swineherd
know who he was and straightway bear the news
to shrewd Penelope, not keep it secret.
Telemachus was first to speak to him:
“Eumaeus comes! What is the talk in town?
Have they returned by now, the arrogant wooers
who laid a trap, or do they stalk me still?”
Answering him, swineherd Eumaeus said:
“I did not care to ask about such things
while in the town. My heart told me straightway
I should return here once I gave my message.
As I went in, I met a man of yours,
a herald, who addressed your mother first.
I did see something else with these two eyes.
From high above the town, on Hermes’ hill,
as I was coming back I saw a ship
row in the bay with many men aboard.
They bristled shields and spears sharp on both ends.
They looked to be the men you ask about.”
St that, Telemachus displayed a smile
and winked toward his sire, but not the swineherd.
When dinner preparations were complete,
they feasted, not a man without full share.
They satisfied desire for food and drink,
then lay where they could take the gift of sleep.


Book 17

When early Dawn next showed her coral fingers,
the youth tied well-wrought sandals round his feet,
Telemachus, Odysseus’ treasured son.
He chose a sturdy spear that fit his hand
and left for town, but first he told his swineherd:
“Old sir, I go to town so I can soothe
my mother, who I think will not refrain
from weeping, sad lament and shedding tears
until she sees me. You I give this task:
escort the stranger into town, where he
can beg for food. Someone may choose to give
a crumb, a sip, but I am in no shape
to keep men here, grief-stricken as I am.
If that should anger him, so must it be,
but I set store by speaking forthright words.”
Astute Odysseus gave his own response:
“Ah friend, I do not wish to stay with you.
A vagabond prefers a town, not fields,
for begging food. Someone may choose to give.
I am too old to labor on a farm,
obedient to an overseer’s commands.
So go. This man will guide me as you bade,
as soon as I warm up beside the fire.
I have but these poor clothes and might succumb
to morning frost. He said the town is far.”
St that, Telemachus strode off the farm
on nimble feet and planned the suitors’ doom.
When he at length stood at his pleasant halls,
he propped his spear against a lofty column
and entered, crossing over his threshold.
The first to see him was nurse Eurycleia,
as she was spreading fleeces on armchairs.
She raced to him in tears, and soon came all
the household maids of resolute Odysseus.
Greeting the youth, they kissed his head and shoulders.
forth from her room walked shrewd Penelope,
like Artemis or golden Aphrodite.
Tearful, she threw her arms around her son
and kissed his head, kissed both his radiant eyes.
Then, weeping still, she showered him with words:
“Telemachus is here! A welcome sight
I never thought to see since you set sail
against my will for news of your dear father.
Now come relate to me what you have learned!”
Telemachus regarded her and said:
“Mother, do not arouse my heart to weep,
not after all my scrapes with horrid fate.
No, you should bathe yourself, put on clean clothes,
mount to your upper room with servant maids
and promise heaven flawless hecatombs
if only Zeus will bring about revenge.
Now I must join the men’s assembly, meet
a stranger who came here aboard my ship.
I sent him on ahead with trusted comrades,
and bade Piraeus host him in his halls
till I arrive and send for him myself.”
She quietly acquiesced in his command.
She bathed, attired herself in spotless clothes
and promised heaven flawless hecatombs
if only Zeus would bring about revenge.
Telemachus, meantime, strode out the door,
his spear in hand, two lively dogs behind.
Athena showered him with godly grace
that spellbound every person he encountered.
The strutting suitors gathered round the youth
with flattering words but evil in their hearts.
Telemachus ignored the thieving throng
and sat instead with Mentor, Antiphus,
and Halitherses, longtime household friends.
He shared their bench, and each one questioned him.
Soon spear-renowned Piraeus came in view,
with Theoclymenus, the guest. Straightway
Telemachus approached and joined the two.
Piraeus was the first to speak a word:
“Telemachus, send servants to my house
to bring to you your gifts from Menelaus.”
Astute Telemachus in turn declared:
“Piraeus, we do not know what will happen.
In case the suitors strutting through my halls
should cut me down and steal my patrimony,
I would want you—not them—to have those gifts.
But if my plans result in death for them,
I would desire to have the gifts brought home.”
The youth led Theoclymenus inside,
and when they were within Odysseus’ palace,
they laid their garments down on handy chairs
and sat in polished tubs to cleanse their bodies.
When servant maids had washed and oiled their skin,
the two, in tunics topped by woolly cloaks,
stepped from the tubs and sat on sumptuous couches.
A maid poured hand-rinse water from a flask
of finest gold above a silver basin
and placed beside the two a glossy table.
The honored head housekeeper set out bread
and food of various kinds, proud of her stores.
Penelope was seated facing them,
winding a spindle, filling it with thread.
The diners reached and took the ready treats,
which soon dispatched desire for food or drink.
Penelope was then the first to speak:
“Telemachus, I will retire upstairs
and go to bed, a bed that makes me weep,
its bedding wet with tears since when your sire
sailed off with Atreus’ sons. Yet you declined—
today, although no suitor had arrived—
to tell me what you heard of his return.”
Telemachus met her gaze as he replied:
“I now will tell you, Mother, all there is.
We first arrived in Pylos, Nestor’s realm,
where he received me in his high-roofed palace,
warmly, as might a father treat a son,
long lost, who suddenly came home. So Nestor,
and Nestor’s glorious sons, gave me a welcome.
But he had not heard anything about
Odysseus, whether he still lives or died.
He sent me on to spear-famed Menelaus
aboard a chariot that his fast team drew.
Helen was there, on whose account so many
Trojans and Greeks had toiled at heaven’s whim.
When warlike Menelaus questioned me,
asked why I came to lovely Lacedaemon,
I told him everything that has occurred,
and Menelaus made me this response:
‘They would disgrace a mighty warrior’s bed
by sleeping there, low cowards that they are!
As when, within a lion’s copse, a doe
leaves newborn nursing fawns to lie, asleep,
while she goes out among the grassy vales
to feed, but he returns, descries their nest
and deals an awful fate to both the fawns,
so would Odysseus finish off those suitors.
I wish—by Zeus, Athena and Apollo—
that he could be the way he was in Lesbos
the day he faced Philomelides, wrestling,
and threw him down before the cheering Greeks.
So should Odysseus face those would-be bridegrooms,
and each should soon be wed to misery.
But as to what you asked, there is no way
I could dissemble, hide the truth from you,
the truth of what the old sea god revealed,
and I will hold back nothing that he told.
He said that on an isle he saw your father,
in nymph Calypso’s halls against his will,
unable to regain his fatherland
because he had no ship or crew to row
and carry him across the sea’s broad back.’
So said the son of Atreus, Menelaus.
My business done, I sailed, and heaven sent
a wind that brought me to my homeland quickly.”
Telemachus’ report disturbed her heart,
but godlike Theoclymenus spoke up:
“Laertes’ son Odysseus’ honored wife,
he does not clearly see, so heed my word,
and I will prophesy to you, tell all.
My witnesses are Zeus, this bounteous feast
and bold Odysseus’ hearth, where I have come:
Odysseus is within his land today!
He sits, he prowls, he learns of malefactions,
he plans the doom of every single suitor.
At sea an omen bird of such portent
appeared, and I apprised Telemachus.”
Prudent Penelope declared to him:
“If only what you say should come to pass,
you soon would know my friendliness and gifts,
so much that those you meet will think you blest.”
As they sat speaking so among themselves,
the suitors milled outside Odysseus’ halls,
amused themselves with javelin and discus,
on level land that they had arrogated.
When time to eat approached, and flocks returned
from distant pastures, led by seasoned herdsmen,
among the suitors Medon spoke, by far
their favorite herald, guest at every feast:
“Young men, now that you have enjoyed your sport,
come to the halls, and we shall make a banquet.
To eat at dinnertime is not amiss.”
The suitors to a man obeyed his word.
After they came inside the well-worn halls,
they threw their cloaks on cushioned chairs or couches.
They slaughtered fattened goats and full-grown sheep.
They butchered hogs and, from the herd, one ox
to constitute their feast. Odysseus, meantime,
prepared to go to town beside the swineherd,
and chief swineherd Eumaeus frankly said:
“Stranger, you have in mind to go to town
today as Master bade. If I could choose,
I would prefer you here to guard the farm,
but I fear him who might perceive a cause
for my rebuke—severe, as masters give—
so let us briskly walk. The day proceeds
apace, and toward nightfall it will grow colder.”
Odysseus, he of untold skills, replied:
“I know. I understand and grasp your point,
so let us go. You keep ahead of me,
but let me have a staff—if one be handy—
to lean on, since they say the way is rough.”
He slung his shabby bag around his shoulders,
tattered and torn, with string where strap should be.
Eumaeus found for him the staff he wanted.
The two set out. Herdsmen and dogs remained
behind as guards. Eumaeus led his lord,
in form a vagabond, pathetic, old,
in wretched clothes, supported by the staff.
They made their way along the rugged road,
and when they neared the town, they reached a spring,
the flowing spring where townsfolk drew pure water.
Polyctor, Ithacus and Neritus
unearthed the spring amid a poplar grove
that circles round it. Frigid water flows
through rocks above. Still higher stands an altar
for nymphs, where wayfarers may sacrifice.
The two there met Melanthius, Dolius’ son.
He led the finest goats the flocks contained—
for suitors’ feasts. Two herders followed him.
He saw the travelers, called them scornful names,
abuse most foul, which riled Odysseus’ heart:
“Well, here we have a wretch who leads a wretch!
The gods will always match the like with like.
Miserable swineherd, where do you lead this pig,
this beggar, loathsome cadger of crumbs at feasts?
Past many doorposts will he force his shoulders,
begging for scraps, no chance for sword or kettle.
If you would give me him to mind my folds,
to be the cleaner, bring the kids their feed,
his diet of whey might make his thighs robust.
But he knows only sloth and will not want
to work instead of slinking through the people,
begging for charity to feed his belly.
Well, I will tell you one thing, which shall be:
if he should wander in Odysseus’ palace,
the scores of footstools men will throw at him
will grievously abrade his head and ribs.”
That said, he meanly kicked Odysseus, kicked
a hip, but failed to knock him off the path.
Odysseus held his ground and contemplated
whether to swing his staff and kill the churl
or lift him, bash his head against the ground.
But he restrained himself. The swineherd, though,
rebuked Melanthius, raised his hands and prayed:
“Daughters of Zeus! Spring nymphs! If once my lord
burned thighs for you, thighs overlaid with fat
of lambs and goats, fulfill this wish for me:
may gods lead him, Odysseus, home again!
If so, he will dissolve your haughty airs,
Melanthius, the arrogance you flaunt
round town with herdsmen who destroy the flocks.”
Goatherd Melanthius replied to him:
“My, how this troublemaking dog does rant!
Someday I will put him aboard a ship
and sell him far away from Ithaca.
Apollo may strike down Telemachus
today within his halls, or suitors may,
since certainly Odysseus will not come.”
That said, he left the two men where they stood,
and rapidly he reached his master’s halls.
He strode inside and sat among the suitors,
facing Eurymachus, who favored him.
The cooks served up a share of roasted meats;
the honored head housekeeper brought him bread.
The swineherd and Odysseus soon approached.
They paused when floating round them came a sound,
a lyre’s sweet tones that Phemius played inside.
Odysseus clasped the swineherd’s hand and said:
“Eumaeus, this must be Odysseus’ palace!
Easy to recognize, it is distinctive.
Observe its several wings, adjoining court
with corniced wall and gates impregnable—
a bastion that no men could overrun.
Inside I sense there is a crowd of feasters.
The smell of fat emerges, while a lyre
intones the sounds gods bid us play at feasts.”
To that, swineherd Eumaeus, you replied:
“You noticed well, observant as you are.
But now we should consider what to do.
Should you be first to go inside these halls
and meet the suitors while I wait outside,
or would you rather stay while I go first?
Do not wait long, lest one of them might notice,
and strike or throw at you. Keep that in mind.”
Snshakable Odysseus answered him:
“I know. I understand what you are saying,
but you go on ahead while I wait here.
I am not ignorant of blows and missiles.
My heart is staunch and has endured tough trials
at sea, in war, and now another looms.
Yet even I cannot ignore my belly—
the hunger that has brought down untold men
and caused the launch of well-constructed ships
to raid more prosperous foes across the seas.”
Sn such a vein the two allies conversed.
A dog that lay close by pricked up his ears,
Argus, the dog Odysseus, when a youth,
had reared but never had a chance to hunt.
At first young men had led the dog afield
to hunt wild mountain goats, or deer, or hares,
but now, his master gone, he lay despised
on heaps of dung outside the courtyard gates,
the dung of mules and oxen piled up high
to fertilize Odysseus’ broad domains.
There lay the hapless tick-infested Argus,
but when he sensed Odysseus was at hand,
he pricked up both his ears and wagged his tail,
although he lacked the strength to reach his master.
Odysseus saw and wiped away a tear,
unnoticed by the swineherd, whom he told:
“That dog, Eumaeus, lying there in dung,
has excellent form, but I cannot be sure
if he has running speed to match his build,
or is more like the lap dogs that some men
will keep to boast about but never use.”
To that, swineherd Eumaeus, you replied:
“He is the dog of one who died afar.
If he were as he was—in form and deed—
the day Odysseus left and went to Troy,
you would be awed to see his speed and courage.
Nothing could get away in deepest woods,
no beast that he pursued or sought to track,
but now his lot is bleak, his master gone,
and scornful maids will not take care of him.
Manservants here no longer have a master
and therefore leave unsavory tasks untended.
Far-thundering Zeus expunges half the worth
of men whose day of servitude has come.”
Having said that, Eumaeus went inside,
straight to the central hall where suitors lounged.
Meanwhile the fate of dismal death took Argus
once he had seen his lord, gone twenty years.
Telemachus was first to spy Eumaeus,
meandering through the halls. Straightway the youth
gave him a nod. The swineherd took a stool
that stood near where a carver placed the meat
for passing out among the feasting suitors.
The swineherd brought the stool and set it down
beside his young lord’s table, where an aide
served ample portions both of meat and bread.
Not far behind Eumaeus came Odysseus,
in form an aged man, a wretched beggar,
supported on his staff, in tattered clothes.
He sat upon the threshold, near the door,
against a cypress post that once a builder
skillfully planed till straight as tautened string.
Telemachus addressed the swineherd, bade
him choose a loaf from those within the basket,
and meat, as much as both his arms could hold.
“Go give the foods to yonder guest. Tell him
to beg for more from every suitor here.
Restraint does not behoove a needy man.”
Eumaeus heard, and right away he went
and stood beside Odysseus, where he said:
“Telemachus sends these, and he says you
should beg for more from every strutting suitor.
Restraint does not behoove a mendicant.”
Answering that, adroit Odysseus said:
“Lord Zeus, permit Telemachus to thrive,
to have whatever things his heart desires.”
With both his hands, he grasped and set the gifts
before his feet atop his shabby bag,
and while the minstrel sang, he ate the food.
After he ate, the minstrel stopped his song,
and suitors grew unruly, but Athena
stood at Laertes’ son Odysseus’ side.
She prompted him to beg among the feasters,
a means to learn which ones were just, which not—
though she was not about to spare a one.
So he set out and begged from every man,
his hands held out as would a longtime beggar.
They pitied him and gave. They also mused
just who the man might be and whence he came,
until goatherd Melanthius declared:
“Let those who woo the lovely queen hear me
about this stranger. I saw him before.
I saw the swineherd, yonder, lead him here,
but I know not what stock he claims as his.”
At that, Antinous assailed Eumaeus:
“Notorious swineherd! Why did you bring him
to us? We have too many vagrants now,
vexatious beggars who disrupt our feasts.
Do they not eat your master’s food enough
without this extra mouth that you have brought?”
Swineherd Eumaeus, you replied to him:
“Antinous, you blame me incorrectly.
Why would I go abroad to seek a migrant,
except for one who benefits the people,
such as a prophet, healer, carpenter
or sacred minstrel who delights through song?
Such men are sought throughout the boundless earth,
but no one seeks a begging parasite.
Of all the suitors, you are always harshest
on us, Odysseus’ loyal men, but I
care not, so long as shrewd Penelope
lives in these halls, Telemachus as well.”
Astute Telemachus advised the swineherd:
“Enough. Do not respond to his incitement.
It is his wont to aggravate, to taunt
with galling words designed to rile his listeners.”
She youth then faced Antinous and said:
“Antinous, you seem to care for me,
in that you bid this stranger leave my halls
perforce, but may the gods not let that happen.
No, give to him, I ask. I do not mind.
Do not pretend concern about my mother,
or servants in divine Odysseus’ palace.
Concern for them would not occur to you,
since you want nothing but to feed yourself.”
Snswering him, Antinous declared:
“High-flown Telemachus, you speak nonsense!
If every suitor gave him alms like this stool,
he would keep out of here at least three months.”
He waved and made as if to throw the stool
on which he kept his pampered feet while feasting,
but other suitors filled the beggar’s bag
with meat and bread. Odysseus was about
to go and taste the gifts beside the threshold
but stopped beside Antinous and said:
“Friend, give! You do not seem the basest here.
Your royal look says you may be the noblest,
so you should give more generously than they,
and I will spread your fame throughout the earth.
I once possessed a home among a folk
where I had wealth and often gave to vagrants,
whatever type might come to me with needs.
Servants I had, a host, and everything
that constitutes what people label wealth.
But for no reason, Zeus took that away.
With roving buccaneers he sent me off
to distant Egypt, so that I might die.
I moored my crescent ships in Egypt’s river,
and afterward I told my worthy crew
to wait beside the moorage, guard our vessels,
with aid of scouts that I dispatched to heights.
My men succumbed to arrogance, however,
and stormed the fair Egyptian countryside.
Women and helpless young they led away,
and killed the men. But soon the screams reached town,
where men took note, and with the gleam of dawn
they came. The plain was packed with men, with chariots,
with brilliant bronze. The thunder-lover Zeus
shot panic through my men, and none had heart
to stand, to face the threats from every quarter.
Many a comrade fell to whetted weapons.
The victors took the rest to work as slaves,
but me they gave to their distinguished guest,
Iasus’ son, Dmetor, king of Cyprus,
from whence I struggled here through untold trials.”
Raising his voice, Antinous replied:
“What deity sent you here to wreck our feast?
Go stand elsewhere, away from where I sit,
lest you be shipped to Egypt, if not Cyprus.
You are a brazen, disrespectful beggar!
You badgered every man, and each one gave
because there is no reason to hold back
when handing out another man’s possessions.”
Retreating one step, sly Odysseus said:
“Well, now, your brains do not reflect your looks!
You would not give a grain of your own salt,
since from another’s stores you lack the warmth
to give a crust of bread despite this plenty.”
Those words aroused Antinous’ heart to fury,
and he retorted under frowning brows:
“You will not wander through these halls unhurt
and make escape since you insulted me.”
He struck Odysseus’ shoulder with the stool,
struck from behind, but he stood like a rock,
unmoved, impervious to Antinous’ blow.
He shook his head in silence, planning doom,
then walked back to the door, sat down beside
his well-stocked beggar’s bag and made a speech:
“Hear me, you men who court the lovely queen,
that I may tell you what my heart commands!
I would not be aggrieved, would not condemn
a man who, when there is a fight for spoils,
strikes blows contesting oxen, say, or sheep.
Antinous, though, struck me because I hunger,
harrowing hunger such as torments mortals,
so if there are for beggars gods or Furies,
Antinous should die before he weds!”
Eupeithes’ son Antinous replied:
“Stranger, be still and eat or go away!
For surly speech these youths may drag you out
by arms or legs and beat you black and blue!”
The other suitors criticized his words,
and one among the bolder youths might say:
“Antinous, you erred to strike the vagrant.
What if he is in truth a god disguised?
The gods sometimes appear as foreign men.
They take on various forms and haunt the towns,
to see which men do right and which do wrong.”
Antinous ignored these suitors’ views.
Despondence overcame Telemachus,
seeing his father hit, but no tear fell.
He shook his head, envisaging revenge.
As soon as shrewd Penelope got word
that someone had been struck, she told her maids:
“I wish Apollo would return the blow!”
Head maid Eurynome replied to her:
“If only prayers we made should be fulfilled,
not one of them would live to see Dawn come.”
Astute Penelope replied to that:
“The wooers are hateful, madam, scheming crimes;
Antinous, though, is most like death itself.
A wretched stranger wanders through the halls
and begs for charity, constrained by need.
The suitors all responded, gave to him,
except Antinous, who struck his back.”
In such a way she spoke among her maids.
They sat upstairs. Odysseus ate below.
She called the swineherd to her side and said:
“Divine Eumaeus, go and bid that guest
ascend that I may now inquire of him
if he has heard reports about Odysseus,
or even chanced to see him while he wandered.”
Swineherd Eumaeus, you replied to her:
“If ever those Achaeans hold their tongues,
he might address you, even cast his spell.
Three nights I had him, kept him three full days
inside my hut when first he jumped his ship—
too short a time to tell me all his trials.
As when a man may meet a bard, divine,
who knows and sings the words that mortals love,
the man will listen, rapt, each time he sings,
so did he charm me while I hosted him.
He claims Odysseus’ stock and his are kin—
the branch from Crete where Minos’ lineage lives.
From there he struggled here through countless woes,
wandering far. He swears he heard my lord
is close at hand, among Thesprotian folk,
alive, about to bring great treasure home.”
Astute Penelope proclaimed to him:
“Summon him here, so he can speak himself.
The suitors may carouse inside our gates
or, if they should see fit, in their own halls
where still their own possessions lie untouched,
except the bread and wine their servants take
while every day their masters loiter here,
slaughtering oxen, sheep and fattened goats.
They gorge themselves, they drink our sparkling wines
without a qualm. There is no man here now,
such as Odysseus was, to ward off ruin.
If only he might reach his lands again,
his son and he would make the ruffians pay.”
Gods caused Telemachus to sneeze, an omen,
resounding through the halls. His mother laughed,
and straightway she again addressed Eumaeus:
“On my behalf, go call that stranger here!
My son’s sneeze just endorsed the words I said.
I wish that death would come upon the suitors,
that not a one will dodge his fate and doom.
Keep this in mind, what I will tell you now:
if there is truth in what the stranger says,
I will attire the man in princely garb.”
The swineherd listened well and left her there.
He stood beside Odysseus, where he said:
“Dear stranger, shrewd Penelope wants you;
Telemachus’ mother’s heart bids her inquire
about her husband. She has suffered much.
If there is truth in everything you said,
she promises a cloak and tunic, clothes
you need. In those you may entreat the folk
for food, and those who choose to give will do so.”
To that, perdurable Odysseus said:
“Eumaeus, soon I may recount the truth
to shrewd Penelope, Icarius’ daughter.
I know about him since we shared like trials.
But now I fear the throng of wanton suitors,
whose pride and violence defy the gods.
As I went through the halls just now, a man
attacked and hurt me though I did no wrong.
Telemachus did not protect me then.
So bid the queen stay in her rooms a while,
impatient though she be, until sundown,
when I will speak about her man’s return,
seated beside her fire. My clothes indeed
are rags, as you have known since first we met.”
The swineherd heard Odysseus out, then left
and walked back through the lady’s door. She said:
“You do not bring him in. Did he refuse?
Does he unduly fear someone? Perhaps
he is ashamed, but bashful beggars starve.”
Swineherd Eumaeus, you replied to her:
“His words were right, as any would agree
who sought to dodge those overweening brutes.
He bids you wait until the sun departs,
when it will be propitious for you, Queen,
to meet alone and hear the stranger speak.”
To that, alert Penelope replied:
“The stranger understands the suitors well,
for there are none among earth’s mortal men
who scheme such wanton, violent deeds as they.”
So spoke Penelope. The swineherd left,
no more to say. He went among the suitors,
and forthwith he addressed Telemachus—
their heads together lest the others hear:
“My friend, I will go soon and guard the pigs—
my livelihood and yours. Be careful now.
Above all else, keep safe, and stay alert
else you may suffer. Many here plan violence.
May Zeus destroy them first and spare us harm!”
Astute Telemachus replied to that:
“So let it be, old friend. You go at dusk,
return at dawn and bring the day’s fat victims.
The gods and I will oversee the palace.”
Accordingly, the swineherd took a seat,
and when he had his fill of food and drink,
he headed toward the swine. He left the halls,
teeming with feasters who by then had turned
to dance and song, the evening having come.


Book 18

There came a common vagrant, one who begged
around the town, with ravenous appetite
for endless food and drink. He was not strong
or tough despite his towering stature’s look.
Arnaeus was the name his mother gave
at birth, but fellow youths nicknamed him Irus
because he served as messenger when asked.
He sought to drive Odysseus from his halls,
accosted him and spoke reproachful words:
“Get out, old man, or be dragged by your foot!
Do you not see how these men nod at me,
a sign to drag you out? I would feel sheepish,
so you get out before we come to blows!”
Adroit Odysseus scowled at him and said:
“Are you possessed? I neither harmed nor slurred you,
and I do not resent your generous handouts.
These rooms will hold us both; there is no need
for rivalry. You look to be a roamer,
like me, and may the gods grant you abundance.
You should not speak of blows, lest you annoy me.
Though old, I might well wet your lips and chest
with blood—a means to have tranquility,
ensure that you would never come again
to this, Laertes’ son Odysseus’ palace.”
The vagrant Irus angrily declared:
“Aha! This glutton speaks torrential words,
as might old women! I predict for him
a thorough beating, teeth strewn on the ground
as if he were a crop-destroying hog.
Prepare yourself so all these men can watch
us fight! But how can you compete with youth?”
So there, before the lofty palace gates
and polished threshold, those two grew enraged.
The mighty prince Antinous observed.
He laughed, delighted, as he told the suitors:
“Friends, no such sight as this occurred before,
this thing a god has brought for our amusement!
Irus and yonder stranger are about
to come to blows, and we should goad them on!”
The suitors laughed, and every one agreed.
They gathered round the beggars—barely clad—
and heard Eupeithes’ son Antinous:
“Hear me again, you suitors, while I speak!
Bellies of goats are toasting, those we filled
with blood and fat when we last ate a meal.
Whichever man shall have the strength to win,
let him select the belly he prefers.
Let him hereafter always eat with us,
and we shall brook no other beggar here.”
His fellows heard Antinous and approved.
To that, Odysseus craftily proclaimed:
“There is no way to beat a younger man,
old as I am and weary, but my gut
incites me, urges me to take on blows,
if every suitor swears a solemn oath
that none of you will come to Irus’ aid
by striking me so as to let him win.”
Suitors agreed to swear as he prescribed,
and when their solemn promises were made,
divine Telemachus spoke out among them:
“Guest, if your manly heart commands that you
defend against this man, no other here
will intervene lest he would fight us all.
I am your host, and yonder kings agree,
Antinous, Eurymachus, both mighty.”
The suitors all concurred. Odysseus then
arranged his ragged clothes, revealing thighs
both large and mighty, baring shoulders—broad—
muscular arms, a powerful chest. Athena
stood at his side and made his limbs still larger.
The swaggering suitors, mouths agape, admired,
and one might tell another standing near:
“Thanks to himself there soon will be no Irus,
such are the thighs the old man’s rags concealed.”
They talked, and cowardice swelled in Irus’ heart
even as household workers forced him forward,
despite the fear that caused his limbs to quake.
Antinous addressed a stern rebuke:
“You ought not to exist, to have been born,
if you have craven fear and quail at him,
an aged man worn down by tribulation,
and I will say outright how things shall be.
If he should overpower you and win,
I will by ship deport you to the mainland,
Echetus’ realm, the king who tortures mortals.
There he will cut away your nose and ears,
uproot your testicles as food for dogs.”
When Irus heard, his limbs quaked even more.
He raised his fists as if to block Odysseus.
Steadfast unshakable Odysseus wondered
whether to strike him lifeless straightaway
or use a gentler blow and knock him down.
He judged it wiser not to use full force,
to moderate his blow and draw less notice.
First Irus punched; his fist glanced off the shoulder.
Odysseus struck below the ear and crushed
the bone. Red blood gushed forth from Irus’ mouth.
He fell in dust, he moaned, he ground his teeth,
he kicked the earth. The high-born suitor crowd
threw up their hands in laughter, but Odysseus
grabbed Irus’ foot. He dragged him through the yard,
to near the gates, and there against the fence
he rested him. He handed him a staff
and taunted him with these sardonic words:
“Sit here and drive away stray dogs and pigs!
No longer bully strangers, badger beggars,
unless you want a thrashing even worse!”
That said, across his back he slung his bag—
tattered, in shreds, its shoulder strap a string—
and sat beside the door. The suitors stopped there,
laughing aloud, and offered a salute:
“Stranger, may Zeus and fellow gods grant you
whatever in your heart you most desire
for having ended Irus’ ceaseless begging.
We will transport him to the mainland soon,
Echetus’ realm, the king who tortures mortals.”
So spoke the suitors, words that pleased Odysseus.
Antinous handed him an animal’s paunch,
infused with fat and blood. Amphinomus
presented loaves selected from the basket,
and raised a golden cup in warm salute:
“Old stranger, hail! And may the future bring
relief from ills the past has laid on you!”
Adroit Odysseus cannily replied:
“Amphinomus, how wise you seem to be!
About your famous father I have heard,
Dulichian Nisus, powerful and rich.
They say he fathered you, and you seem decent,
so let me tell you this which you should heed.
The earth boasts nothing more forlorn than man
among the beasts who breathe and crawl her face.
He hopes to have no pain in future times
if gods are kind and nimble knees endure,
but when the blessed gods prescribe travails,
with heavy heart he bears his unsought woes,
because it is the lot of men on earth
to take from day to day what Zeus ordains.
Why, even I was once a man of wealth
and used my power in wanton, unjust ways,
relying on my sire, my close kinfolk.
A man should never think himself supreme,
but must accept in silence what gods dole.
I see these wooers as they plan foul deeds,
consume another’s wealth, affront his wife,
but he will not much longer be away,
for he is very near his land. May gods
conduct you home lest you pay recompense
when soon enough he reaches this, his home.
I think you will not part without bloodshed,
you wooers and he, once joined below his roof.”
That said, he poured libation, took a draught,
and placed the cup back in the young king’s hands.
Amphinomus walked through the room afraid,
nodding his head. At heart he foresaw ruin
but did not flee. Athena held him back—
to fall before Telemachus’ sharp spear.
He sat down on the chair from which he rose.
Divine Athena then suggested to
Icarius’ daughter, shrewd Penelope,
that she appear before the suitors, tease
their hearts, so as to foster sweet revenge,
make it more savory for her son and husband.
Penelope laughed aloud and spoke a word:
“Eurynome, I have a sudden wish:
appear among the suitors, hated men,
and tell my son he would be well advised
if he would not consort with them so much
since they plan harm to him despite kind speech.”
Head housekeeper, Eurynome, replied:
“What you just said, my child, is on the mark,
so go there, tell your son and be forthright,
but wash and oil your cheeks before you go,
or else these tears will stain your face, the tears
that always flow because you are bereft.
But now your son has reached the age that you
have prayed to see—a beard grows on his chin.”
Astute Penelope declared to her:
“Eurynome, I will not take your counsel
that I should wash and rub my skin with oil.
The gods who hold Olympus mar my looks,
yes, ever since Odysseus sailed away.
Now tell Autonoë and Hippodamia
to come and stand by me within the hall.
I fear to go alone among those men.”
At that, Eurynome searched through the palace
and told the pair of servant girls to come.
Goddess Athena watched Penelope,
Icarius’ child, and shed on her sweet sleep
until her limbs relaxed as she reclined,
lay on her couch. On her the goddess then
bestowed endowments so that men would marvel.
She spread the woman’s face with yet more beauty,
divine, the very kind that Aphrodite
applies when she attends the Graces’ dance.
She made her look more tall, voluptuous,
her skin more pure than ivory newly cut.
Her work complete, the brilliant goddess left,
but now the two handmaids came from the halls,
chattering loudly. Sleep released the queen,
who raised her hands, wiped off her cheeks and said:
“A deep and gentle slumber overgrew me,
much like the death I wish that Artemis
would grant so I would need no longer grieve
and pine away for my beloved husband.
He was the finest man who sailed to Troy.”
That said, she ventured downstairs from her room,
but not alone. The two maids followed closely
until the radiant woman neared the suitors.
She stood beside a roof-supporting pillar
and held a lustrous veil across her cheeks.
A loyal handmaid stood on either side.
Rapture enthralled the suitors’ hearts, their knees,
and each desired to lie with her in bed,
but she addressed her son, Telemachus:
“Telemachus, your mind has gone astray.
When you were just a child, your thoughts were sound,
but now that you have grown to manhood’s stage,
although you look to be of rich man’s stock,
to judge by size and comely face alone,
no longer are your mind and thoughts astute.
I learned of unjust deeds within these halls,
and you allow them—wrongs against a stranger.
Suppose that stranger, in our house today,
had come to serious harm by such abuse?
You would invite dishonor, widespread shame!”
Alert Telemachus faced up to her:
“Mother, I do not mind that you reprove,
but I know how to think and separate
correct from wrong, unlike when I was younger.
Still, I cannot sort everything out wisely,
not with so many men distracting me,
devising ruin, while I have no allies.
The stranger’s fight with Irus did not meet
the suitors’ hopes. He proved to have more might.
If only Zeus, Athena and Apollo
would grant that suitors who infest our halls
soon bow their heads, subdued, out in the court
or here inside, the joints of each gone limp,
as yonder Irus is! Against the gates
he sits with nodding head as might a drunk
who cannot stand up straight or use his feet
to make it home because his limbs are slack.”
Mother and son conversed in such a way
until Eurymachus addressed the queen:
“Icarius’ daughter, shrewd Penelope,
if more Achaeans in Argos saw you now,
there would be far more suitors at your halls
for future feasts since you surpass all women
in beauty, grace and clever mind alike.”
Cautious Penelope replied to him:
“Eurymachus, what beauty I once had
the gods destroyed the day the vessels sailed
with Argive men, including my Odysseus.
If he should come again to care for me,
what loveliness I had might be restored.
But as it is, I grieve, perplexed by heaven.
The day Odysseus left his fatherland,
he clasped me by my right hand’s wrist and said:
‘Dear wife, I know not if we strong-greaved Greeks
will one bright day return from Troy unharmed.
They say the Trojan men are worthy fighters,
good spearmen, also skilled at archery
and driving fleet-foot teams, which often are
determinants of victory in war.
A god may bring me back, or I may die
in Troy, and you must tend affairs at home.
Maintain my parents here within these halls,
as now, however long I may be absent,
until you see our son’s first growth of beard.
Then marry whom you choose and live with him.’
So said Odysseus. Now it comes to pass.
A night of hateful marriage will come soon,
as Zeus denies me days of happiness,
and leaves my heart and soul but painful grief.
You suitors do not keep established custom,
by which you would—if you desired to woo
the daughter of a noble, wealthy man—
compete by bringing me your own livestock
for family feasts, and costly gifts besides.
You would not steal and eat another’s stores.”
Song-suffering, divine Odysseus heard.
He smiled at how she called for gifts, beguiled
with words that teased, though she meant otherwise.
Eupeithes’ son Antinous declared:
“Icarius’ daughter, shrewd Penelope,
if any Greek desires to bring you gifts,
you should accept. Refusal would be wrong.
But we will not return to our domains
until you wed the one you judge the best.”
Antinous’ words pleased every suitor’s heart,
and they sent heralds home to bring back gifts.
Antinous’ man brought back a lovely robe,
well sewn, in which there were a dozen pins,
pure gold, and which bore graceful curving clasps.
Eurymachus’ man brought back an ornate necklace,
golden and strung with amber bright as sunshine.
Eurydamas’ aides brought ornaments for ears,
three black pearls each, each radiating rapture.
Polyctor’s royal son Pisander gave
a neck-chain, lovely jewelry brought by aides,
and every suitor gave a lovely present.
Penelope ascended to her chambers,
and handmaids carried up the worthy gifts.
The suitors turned to pleasures such as dance
and savory song while they awaited evening.
The dark arrived to find them making merry.
They stationed three great cressets in the halls
for light, and round each one put seasoned wood,
thoroughly dried, split fine with whetted bronze,
and bundled, making torches. Servant maids—
Odysseus’ servant maids—were lighting these
when he, Zeus-sprung Odysseus, said to them:
“You maids of long-departed lord Odysseus,
go up to where your honored lady sleeps
and wind her spindle—bringing comfort, cheer,
as she reposes there—or twist her wool.
Leave me to tend the lights for these carousers,
and even though they want to stay for Dawn,
they will not outlast me, for I am tireless.”
The servants laughed and glanced at one another
till fair Melantho spouted spiteful words.
Dolius’ child, she served Penelope,
who raised her as her own and gave her toys.
Penelope was no concern of hers,
and she was mistress to Eurymachus.
With scornful words she now rebuked Odysseus:
“Foolhardy stranger! You must be insane!
You ought to sleep inside a bronze-smith’s shop
or tavern, rather than haranguing us,
ill-bred unlike these men. No whit of fear
you have. You may be drunk, or else your mind
always disposes you to speak nonsense.
Are you cocksure because you bested Irus?
Wait till another, better man steps up,
and beats about your head with powerful arms,
and chases you away, your blood agush.”
From under frowning brows, Odysseus said:
“Telemachus shall know, shrew, what you say,
and he will cut your body limb from limb.”
By churlish threat he drove the women off,
and they went through the halls with weakened knees,
afraid that what he threatened would come true.
Odysseus stayed beside the blazing cressets
and tended each, but meanwhile in his heart
he pondered deeds that would not go undone.
Athena did not let the swaggering suitors
refrain from vicious insults, all the more
to stir Laertes’ son Odysseus’ heart.
Eurymachus was first of them to speak.
He mocked Odysseus while his cohorts laughed:
“Listen to me, you men who court the queen,
so I may tell you what my heart commands!
The gods sent him to haunt Odysseus’ halls.
Our torches’ radiance seems to come from him,
his shiny head that boasts no wisp of hair.”
He faced Odysseus, taunted him directly:
“Stranger, how would you like to work for me
upon my outer fields? I would pay you
for tending trees and laying walls of stone.
Why, I would always keep you fully fed,
see to it you were clothed, and give you sandals.
Since you are used to sloth, you will not choose
to work instead of begging through the town—
your means of feeding that voracious belly.”
Able Odysseus answered him and said:
“Eurymachus, let us compete at work
come springtime when the days are growing long.
In your hayfields I will take up a scythe,
and you do likewise so we may compete
amid abundant grass till darkness falls.
Or if there were a handsome team of oxen—
full-grown and healthy, tawny, fed on grass,
alike in age, alike in strength, unwearied—
and if there were a field that needs be plowed,
you would observe me cut a furrow through.
Or else, if Cronus’ son should cause a war
today, and I possessed two spears, a shield
and helmet, bronze, that fit my temples well,
you would see me fight in the foremost ranks
and would not speak to me with scornful words.
But you are arrogant, your mind is harsh.
You seem to be both large and powerful,
only because the men round you are puny.
Why, if Odysseus chanced to reappear,
how soon his gateway—wide though it may be—
would clog with suitors racing to escape.”
At that, Eurymachus became incensed
and, squinting under narrowed brows, he snapped:
“You wretch! I will soon punish you, who speaks
so brashly to so many men. Your heart
is fearless or subdued by wine, or else
it is your way to speak such arrant nonsense.
Did your defeat of Irus make you smug?”
That said, he seized a stool. Odysseus, though,
ducked down, he crouched beside Amphinomus’ knees.
Eurymachus’ footstool missed him, hit the wine-pourer,
who dropped the pitcher, clattering, on the floor
before he wailed and fell in dust, face up.
The suitors were unnerved throughout the halls,
and thus might one address a nearby wooer:
“This stranger should have perished roving elsewhere
before he showed up here and caused this ruckus.
We fight with vagrant beggars now! No feast
will be delightful as they were before!”
Sturdy Telemachus declaimed among them:
“You act possessed! No longer do you hide
how much you drink! Some god must spur you on!
After you eat and drink, go home and sleep
when you see fit. I cannot drive you out.”
When they heard that, the suitors bit their lips,
amazed to hear Telemachus’ bold words.
Amphinomus was first of them to speak,
proud son of Nisus, King Aretias’ son:
“Friends, let us not attack his nettlesome speech
with hateful words that some might think deserved.
Do not abuse the stranger, or mistreat
the servants in divine Odysseus’ halls.
But come now, let the pourer wet our cups
so we may pour libations, then go home
and leave the stranger in Odysseus’ palace,
in care of palace lord Telemachus.”
She suitor throng were pleased by what he said.
A minion mixed a bowl of wine—Mulius,
Dulichian herald for Amphinomus.
He splashed a drop in every suitor’s cup.
They poured to heaven’s gods; they drank themselves,
and after drinking to their hearts’ content,
each left to sleep within his separate dwelling.


Book 19

Divine Odysseus stayed within his halls,
he and Athena planning suitors’ doom,
and to that end he told Telemachus:
“You need to put away my martial arms,
the lot of them, and use smooth words to fool
the suitors who may ask you where they went:
‘To safeguard them from smoke. They are unlike
they were the day Odysseus left for Troy.
The smoke from every fire increased the soot.
Also, a heaven-dweller cautioned me
that you might fight among yourselves while drunk,
might wound yourselves and compromise your feasts,
your courting. Iron entices men to fight..”
Selemachus obeyed his reverenced father.
He summoned Eurycleia forth and said:
“Madam, withdraw the maids to distant rooms
so I may relocate my father’s arms,
once lustrous, which our household smoke has stained
since Father left when I was but a babe.
I want to store them now beyond fire’s breath.”
She old nurse Eurycleia answered him:
“I wish, dear child, that you would someday take
control of all the objects here, safeguard them.
But who will light the way tonight for you
if you have me seclude the palace maids?”
Telemachus responded to her question:
“That stranger. He must work, else I will cease
to give him food, however far he roamed.”
She quietly acquiesced in his command.
She closed and bolted fast the great hall’s doors.
Odysseus with his glorious son sprang up
and carried out the helmets, studded shields,
the whetted spears. Beside them was Athena,
holding a golden lamp that burned so bright
it caused Telemachus to tell his father:
“Father, my eyes behold a miracle!
The stately walls of our main room, its alcoves,
its pine roof beams, the columns floor to roof,
are glowing as if they were set ablaze!
One of the gods who hold the skies is here!”
Adroit Odysseus answered in a whisper:
“Keep quiet! Contain your thoughts and do not speak!
This is the way Olympus-dwellers do.
Now take your needed rest, but I will stay
and haply once again induce your mother,
sorrowful though she is, to question me.”
Telemachus repaired through palace rooms
beneath the gleam of torches, seeking rest
where he routinely slept. Sweet sleep arrived
and he lay still, awaiting Dawn’s emergence.
In his great hall, divine Odysseus stood,
and he conspired with gleaming-eyed Athena
until Penelope came down the stairs—
like Artemis or golden Aphrodite.
Beside the fire she placed a chair and sat,
a chair inlaid with ivory and silver.
Icmalius made it, made a stool to match—
joined to the chair. He wrapped the seat with fleece.
On that, Penelope now chose to sit.
Meanwhile her white-armed handmaids cleared the hall,
removed the food that heaped the tabletops,
removed the cups from which the revelers drank.
They dumped the cressets’ ash, and in its place
they piled new logs to furnish light and warmth.
Melantho nagged Odysseus yet again:
“Stranger, are you still here, a nighttime pest
who roams about these halls to ogle women?
Go out the gates, you slime, digest your food,
or soon my torch will strike you, drive you out.”
Srafty Odysseus glared at her and said:
“Madwoman, why do you attack me so?
Is it because I reek, wear wretched clothes
and beg for alms? My need leaves me no choice.
Such is the lot of vagrants, wandering men.
There was a time when I possessed a house,
contentment, wealth, and gave to many vagrants
who came in need, whoever they might be.
I had a host of servants, countless objects,
that people call the signs of wealth and comfort,
but Zeus took everything, to suit his will.
Beware lest one day you may find you lack
your prominence among the servant maids.
Your mistress may have had enough of you,
and there is hope Odysseus will return.
But if there be no safe return for him,
thanks to Apollo’s grace his son is here,
Telemachus, who will not overlook
the servant women’s sins. He has matured.”
Alert Penelope heard what he said,
and as suggested, she rebuked the girl:
“You do presume, bold shrew, and I have seen
your treachery, which will cost you your life.
I told you earlier, made you aware
that I desire to ask the visitor
about my husband, whom I sorely miss.”
She turned next to her maid Eurynome:
“Eurynome, bring up a fleece-clad chair
so we can sit and hear each other speak,
the guest and I. I want to question him.”
Eurynome straightway brought near and placed
a well-wrought chair on which she spread a fleece.
Steadfast, unshakable Odysseus sat,
and circumspect Penelope spoke first:
“Guest, first of all let me inquire of you.
What people are you from? What town? What parents?”
Answering her, adroit Odysseus said:
“Lady, the boundless earth contains no one
to rival you, whose fame has reached the skies,
as if you were a god-respecting king
who bears sway over countless mighty men
and treats them well, a king to whom the earth gives
barley and wheat, whose orchards teem with fruit,
whose flocks increase, whose waters swarm with fish,
whose people thrive beneath his temperate reign.
Do ask me what you will of other things,
but not about my stock or fatherland,
lest you should overload my heart with grief,
reminding me of woes. It is not apt
to weep and moan in someone else’s house,
and it is rude to sorrow ceaselessly.
Your maids might censure me, or you yourself
might think my tears betray a drunken mind.”
To that, alert Penelope replied:
“Whatever comeliness I once possessed
the gods dispelled when Argives sailed for Troy.
Among them was Odysseus, my staunch husband.
If he should come again and care for me,
I might become more lovely than before,
but as it is I grieve. A god provokes
the noblemen who rule within these isles—
wooded Zacynthus, Same, Dulichion,
and even here on island Ithaca—
to pay unwanted court and waste my substance.
No longer do I care for guests or beggars,
or heralds though they work for public good.
I pine, I languish, longing for Odysseus.
When pressed to marry, I devised a ruse.
A god suggested I should make a shroud,
working the loom that stands within my chamber.
That very day, I told the crowd of suitors:
‘Young courting men, Odysseus died afar,
but I will not be wed till I complete
the shroud I weave for old Laertes’ rites,
lest work I toiled to weave be waste if he
should sooner meet his final fate and die.
The women hereabouts would censure me
if he should lie unwrapped despite his wealth.
I told the suitors that, deceived them all,
and afterward I worked the loom by day,
but when night fell unraveled what I wove.
For three full years the men remained deluded,
until the march of seasons brought a fourth—
no different till its early days had passed,
when through the treachery of servant maids
the suitors learned and they confronted me,
so I was forced to end my years of weaving.
I have no way to sidestep marriage now,
I have no plan. My parents want that I
should wed. My son resents his wealth’s depletion.
He has by now become the sort of man
to whom Zeus grants the custody of homes.
Now tell me where you came from, tell your lineage.
Your stock is not a stone or ancient oak!”
Adroit Odysseus answered that and said:
“Laertes’ son Odysseus’ honored wife,
you will not cease to ask about my stock,
so I will tell, although it causes grief,
which I have suffered long enough, the lot
of any man like me, long strayed from hearth,
roaming the towns of mortals, facing trials.
Let me now tell you what you asked about.
Amid the sea there is a land called Crete,
fertile and fair and, though an island, men
in legions live there, filling ninety cities,
speaking in divers tongues. Achaeans are there,
beside Cydonians. Native Cretans are
three Dorian clans and near-divine Pelasgians.
The citadel of Cnossos is where Minos,
cohort of Zeus, was king when nine years old.
He later sired my father, bold Deucalion,
who fathered me and lord Idomeneus,
the king who led a fleet of ships to Troy
and fought with Atreus’ sons. They named me Aethon,
the younger son, born last and less accomplished.
Idomeneus abroad, I met Odysseus
when powerful winds drove him to island Crete
from near Malea on his course to Troy.
He reached Amnisus, near Eilythia’s cave,
sailing the treacherous bay to cheat the storm.
He first inquired about Idomeneus,
who once had been his dear and honored guest,
but ten if not eleven dawns had come
since he, Idomeneus, set sail for Ilium.
I showed him to my halls and entertained him
hospitably, there being ample stores.
As for his comrades who arrived with him,
I gave them grain my people raised, bright wine
and cows to kill, enough to please their hearts.
The brave Achaeans waited there twelve days,
trapped by a northerly so strong they could
not stand upright—a wind the gods aroused.
The thirteenth day was calm, and they set sail.”
He told a pack of lies that sounded true,
and while she heard she melted, tears cascading.
As when deep snowpack melts on mountain heights—
south winds dissolving snow the west winds brought—
till pouring runoff overflows the rivers,
so did tears overflow her lovely cheeks
as she sat right beside her man, and though
at heart he felt for her, his weeping wife,
he kept his eyes as still as horn or iron,
a means to hold back tears, conceal his ruse.
When she had had her fill of tears and sorrow,
she spoke to him, responding to his story:
“Now, traveler, I will pose a test for you,
to verify if you indeed received
my husband and his comrades as you claim.
So tell about what sort of clothes he wore,
about the man himself, about his comrades.”
Sdroit Odysseus winced and answered her:
“That was so long ago, it will be hard
to say. By now it is the twentieth year
from when he took his leave of me and sailed,
but I will tell you what my mind recalls.
Odysseus wore a purple woolen cloak,
two layers of wool. It had a golden clasp
with two-pronged catch. Embroidery graced the front:
a dog, whose front paws gripped a spotted fawn,
quivering, pinned. My folk were mystified:
though made of gold, the dog could pin the deer
and it could tremble, eager for escape.
Odysseus also wore a glossy tunic.
Much like an onion skin the tunic was,
supple and bright as if it were the sun,
admired by every woman who beheld.
Now here is something else you should consider.
I do not know if these were clothes from home,
or if his comrades gave them when they sailed,
or someone else, since many people were
his friends, though few Achaeans were his match.
I gave the man a bronze-edged sword myself,
also a fine-spun full-length purple tunic,
as gifts of honor when he sailed away.
There was a slightly older man, a herald,
within his crew whose name I recollect:
Eurybates. He had dark skin, round shoulders,
abundant hair. Odysseus favored him
among his men because they thought alike.”
His words roused even more desire to weep
because she recognized the proofs described,
but when she had her fill of tears and moans,
she spoke to him, declaring her reaction:
“Guest, though you have been pitiable till now,
you will be loved and honored in my halls.
Why, I myself gave him the clothes you spoke of,
folded them in our room and pinned that clasp
to please the man whom I will never greet,
returning from afar to his homeland,
since cruel fate sent him aboard his ship
to reach a place I hate and will not name.”
Her words inspired Odysseus to respond:
“Laertes’ son Odysseus’ honored wife,
you need no longer stain your face, nor scar
your heart lamenting, though I could not fault
another wife who mourned her husband’s death,
a man with whom she slept, whose child she bore,
a man such as Odysseus, like a god,
but you should stop lamenting, hear me out,
while I relate to you the honest truth:
I lately heard Odysseus’ glad return
is near. He is among Thesprotian men,
alive, and will bring home a dazzling trove,
which he now gathers, but his luckless men
met death on wine-hued seas aboard their ship,
just off Thrinacia’s shore. They earned the wrath
of Helios, whose cows they ate, and Zeus,
who caused their deaths while battling stormy seas.
Odysseus grasped the keel and rode the waves
to land Phaeacians hold, men like immortals.
They honored him as if he were a god
with many gifts. They offered him transport
to here, and he would have arrived before
except that he believed it would be best
if he first gathered spoils from various lands.
As well as any man, Odysseus knows
how wealth is gained. No, none can rival him.
Thesprotian monarch Phidon told me that.
He poured libations, swore an oath to me,
that ship and sailors had been well prepared
to bring Odysseus to his fathers’ isle:
a fast Thesprotian vessel rigged to sail,
bound for Dulichion’s nearby fields. The king
showed me the valuables Odysseus massed:
enough to last at least ten generations.
That much Odysseus had accumulated.
But Phidon said his guest left for Dodona,
to hear in high oak boughs the will of Zeus
concerning whether when he went back home
he should go openly or in disguise.
So he is safe and by this time approaches,
close by, no longer far from this, his land
he left long years ago. Now, I will swear.
Let witnesses be Zeus—the highest god—
also Odysseus’ hearth where I have sat:
what I have said shall duly come to pass.
Odysseus shall arrive within this year,
indeed before the moon shall wane and wax.”
To that, astute Penelope replied:
“Guest, if what you report should prove the truth,
straightway you shall enjoy such love and gifts
from me that those you meet will think you blest.
But deep inside I fear a worse result:
I will not see Odysseus, nor will you
receive escort, since there is no lord now,
such as Odysseus was while still alive,
to welcome strangers here and send them off.
Now, handmaids, wash the guest and make a bed,
covered with silky sheets and woolen cloaks,
so he will not be chilled when Dawn appears.
In early morning bathe him, oil his skin,
and let him eat beside Telemachus
in our great hall. No good will come to one
who troubles him, for nothing will such man
receive from me however he may rage.
Guest, how could you confirm that I surpass
in warmth of heart your previous hostesses
were I to leave you squalid, barely clothed,
for dinner? Mortal men exist but briefly.
If one should be unjust in mind and deed,
his fellows hope that he will come to ruin
while yet he lives, and when he dies, they mock.
But if in mind and deed he be upright,
wayfaring men will spread his fame abroad,
where multitudes will ever call him noble.”
Adroit Odysseus answered her and said:
“Laertes’ son Odysseus’ honored wife,
to me fine silky sheets and woolen cloaks
are hateful, ever since I left the hills
of Crete and put my long-oared ship to sea.
Many a sleepless night for me has passed;
many a night on wretched, lumpy beds
I spent awaiting gold-throned goddess Dawn.
To have my feet washed does not please me now,
and I will let no woman handle them,
not one of those who are your servants here,
unless there is one very old, well-practiced,
whose heart has withstood just as much as mine.
I would not mind if she should hold my feet.”
To that, alert Penelope replied:
“Dear guest, no man as sensible as youhas come here, 
none among the wayfarers.
The things you say are well thought out, judicious.
There is an elder servant maid, a nurse,
the one who largely raised my hapless husband.
Her arms embraced him moments after birth,
and she—though failing now—will bathe your feet.
Come, prudent Eurycleia, now! Stand up
and bathe his feet. He is your master’s age.
Odysseus’ hands and feet may be like his,
since mortals quickly age in times of hardship.”
The aged nurse’s hands concealed her face
as she shed tears and spoke a mournful word:
“How helpless I am, child, and Zeus shows he
detests you, heaven-fearing though you are!
No other mortal could do more for Zeus—
by way of burning thighs and hecatombs—
than you have done, while praying you would reach
a sleek old age and see your son matured.
Now Zeus has blocked Odysseus’ return,
and doubtless women have made sport of him
in foreign lands when he was guest in homes,
as palace strumpets here have taunted you,
our guest. In order to avoid more scorn,
you shunned the maid’s footbath my lady offered,
Icarius’ daughter, shrewd Penelope.
But I shall wash your feet on her account,
and for yourself, whose trials have stirred my heart.
Consider now the words that I will speak:
many a foreign stranger has come here,
but none bore such a similarity
as you bear to my lord, in form and voice.”
Adroit Odysseus answered Eurycleia:
“Old woman, everyone who sees me says
that he and I are very much alike,
as you do prudently observe just now.”
The aged woman fetched a gleaming basin
to wash his feet, and poured in ample water—
first cold, then hot till blended right. The man
sat down beside the hearth, but faced the dark
because he realized that when she washed,
a certain scar might tell her who he was.
Indeed, when she drew near to wash, she knew
the scar where once a boar’s white tusk plunged in,
hunting Parnassus with Autolycus,
his mother’s father, whom no man could match
at thievery and oaths—two gifts of god
Hermes, whom he had pleased by burning thighs
of lambs and kids, enough to gain reward.
Autolycus came to Ithaca’s rich land
to meet his daughter’s son, then newly born.
Nurse Eurycleia placed the babe upon
his knees, and spoke a friendly word to him:
“Autolycus, select a name to give
the grandson for whose birth you often prayed.”
Autolycus responded to her thought:
“Daughter and son-in-law, here is a name
I choose because I have provoked the rage
of men and women everywhere on earth:
let him be called Odysseus, anger’s child.
When he is grown, he should come to Parnassus,
his mother’s halls where treasure lies abundant,
from which I will make gifts and send him home.”
One day Odysseus went to get the gifts.
Autolycus, Autolycus’ sons as well,
eagerly clasped his hands and spoke kind words.
Odysseus’ mother’s mother, Amphithea,
kissed both his shining eyes and kissed his head.
Autolycus assigned his glorious sons
to ready dinner, which they rushed to do.
The sons led in a five-years-fattened bull.
They promptly flayed the beast, dismembered it,
skillfully carved it, placed the cuts on spits,
watchfully roasted them and shared them out.
While day remained, until the sun went down,
they feasted, not a soul without fair share.
After the sun had set and darkness came,
the men stretched out and took the gift of sleep.
When early Dawn displayed her rosy fingers,
they went to hunt, swift dogs as well as men:
Autolycus’ sons along with young Odysseus.
They climbed a wooded mountain—steep Parnassus—
and presently they reached its windy folds.
When Helios had newly struck the earth,
arisen from the depths of flowing Ocean,
the hunters found a dell in which the dogs
picked up a scent, and after them raced all
Autolycus’ sons, Odysseus in their forefront,
a stride behind the dogs, his spear in hand.
A massive boar lay deep within thick brush,
so dense the winds would never penetrate,
nor even gleaming beams that Helios cast,
nor endless rains that sometimes fell—so thick
it was—and beds of fallen leaves lay there.
The beast heard thuds of dogs’ and hunters’ feet
as they closed in, and out he sprang to face them.
Bristles erect and eyes like burning coals,
he made his stand. Odysseus took the lead
and rushed him, long spear raised with sturdy arm,
eager to strike, but that boar struck him first,
above the knee. A white tusk ripped his flesh,
a bloody gash, but failed to reach the bone.
In turn, Odysseus struck the boar’s right shoulder,
driving his weapon’s shiny point in deep.
The quarry fell in dust, soul flown away.
Autolycus’ cherished sons went right to work
upon the wound Odysseus’ thigh sustained.
They deftly bound it—voicing a sacred chant
to check the blood—before returning home.
Autolycus, Autolycus’ sons as well,
soon healed their guest, and gave the promised gifts
before they sped him on his journey back
to Ithaca. His mother and his sire
welcomed him warmly. When they questioned him
about his scar, he answered with the tale
of how a boar’s tusk slashed his leg while he was
hunting Parnassus with Autolycus’ sons.
When Eurycleia’s hands first touched the scar,
she recognized its feel and dropped his leg.
His foot fell in the basin. Bronze resounded,
the basin tipped and water poured on stone.
Both joy and sorrow swept the nurse. Her eyes
were filled with tears; she lost her robust voice.
She gently grasped Odysseus’ beard and whispered:
“You are Odysseus, my dear child! I failed
to recognize before I felt my lord!”
She cast her eyes toward Penelope,
wanting to tell her that her man was there.
Penelope, however, could not look—
Athena kept her turned. Odysseus, though,
with one hand grasped old Eurycleia’s throat,
and with the other pulled her near. He whispered:
“Nurse, why would you destroy one whom you nursed
at this same breast? Now, after countless trials
through twenty years, I have regained my land,
and since a god has let you find me out,
keep silent lest another here might learn.
Should you not hold your tongue, I tell you this:
if heaven lets me kill the strutting suitors,
I will not spare you—though my nurse—the day
I kill the faithless maids who taint my halls.”
To him wise Eurycleia whispered back:
“My child, what words flew past your teeth just now!
You know how steady I can be, and stubborn!
I keep a secret as would iron or stone!
And here is something else for you to mull:
if heaven does let you destroy the suitors,
I will inform you which maids in this house
have disrespected you and which are blameless.”
Able Odysseus answered his old nurse:
“There is no need for you to tell me that.
I know myself the way to tell the difference.
You keep your silence, put your trust in gods.”
The aged woman hurried through the halls
to get more footbath water—all had spilled.
When she had washed and rubbed his feet with oil,
Odysseus drew his stool beside the fire
for warmth, and hid the scar beneath his rags.
Soon circumspect Penelope announced:
“Guest, I would like to question you again,
although it is the hour for soothing rest
when sleep might conquer one, however anxious.
A perverse god has given me great sorrow—
I spend my days immersed in sad lament
while watching over handmaids in this house,
but when night comes and they are in their beds,
I lie awake in mine, my heart awash
in poignant cares that vex me as I mourn.
As when Pandareus’ child, the nightingale,
sings sweetly after welcome spring arrives—
perching within the forest’s budding foliage—
with first one warbling sound and then another,
lamenting Itylus—her son by Zethus—
whom once she killed with bronze by accident,
so I am moved first one way, then another:
should I remain here by my son, protect
my goods and servants in this high-roofed palace,
respect my husband’s bed, his people’s will,
or should I leave with one of those Achaeans
who court me, offering boundless bridal gifts?
My son was young before, his mind unsteady,
and he would not allow me leave to wed,
but now that he has reached the stage of manhood,
he pleads with me to go from these, his halls,
and spare the goods that my pursuers eat.
Now hear about a dream I had, explain it.
I feed a flock of twenty geese with grain,
and I derive delight from watching them.
I dreamed a hook-beaked eagle left the hills
and killed them, broke their necks. They lay in heaps
throughout the halls, while he soared up to ether.
Within the dream, I wept, I cried aloud,
till round me crowded fair Achaean women,
while I mourned that the eagle killed my birds.
Then back he flew and perched atop a roof beam.
He spoke as if he had a human voice:
‘Daughter of famed Icarius, take heart!
This is no dream, but real events to come!
The geese depict the suitors; though at first
an eagle came, this time come I, your husband,
who will deal dismal fate to every suitor.’
When he said that, sweet sleep released its grip.
I looked around the halls and saw my geese,
as always eating round the wheat-filled trough.”
Adroit Odysseus answered her, his wife:
“Lady, interpretation cannot change
the words Odysseus spoke within the dream,
which will come true: he spoke of suitors’ ruin,
and not a one will sidestep fate and death.”
Cautious Penelope replied to that:
“Ah guest, how hard to understand our dreams,
how doubtful their import will come to pass!
There are two pairs of gates through which dreams come.
One pair of gates is horn, the other ivory.
A dream that enters through the ivory gates
deceives the dreamer with a message false.
But one that passes through the gates of horn
foretells the truth to anyone who sees.
I do not think my dream was of that sort,
though it foretold events that would be welcome.
Now I will tell you this, to keep in mind:
next dawn will bring a gloomy day, the day
I leave these halls. I will arrange a contest,
involving axes that Odysseus kept.
He lined a dozen up like ribs of ships
and shot an arrow through them all from far.
Now I will make the suitors such a contest.
Whichever one can string Odysseus’ bow
and shoot an arrow through the dozen axes,
him will I follow hence, renouncing this,
my lovely, well-stocked nuptial home for years.
But I will always see it in my dreams.”
Able Odysseus countered with these words:
“Laertes’ son Odysseus’ honored wife,
do not delay the contest you proposed.
In truth, astute Odysseus will arrive
before those men can feel the polished bow,
or stretch its string, or shoot through any axes.”
Then circumspect Penelope declared:
“If you would deign to sit by me here, guest,
no sleep would fall and settle on my eyelids.
But mortals are not meant to bypass rest.
Indeed, the gods ordain a time for sleep
to every mortal on the grain-rich earth.
Now I will leave you for my upstairs chambers,
to lie upon a bed that makes me mourn
and flood myself with tears, since when my lord
debarked for Troy—of which I hate to speak.
Yet I will lie there; you should lie down, too.
Lie on the floor, or let maids make a bed.”
That said, she passed into her spotless rooms,
but not alone—her handmaids at her heels.
After she reached her quarters, maids behind,
she wept for her beloved man Odysseus
until Athena stilled her eyes with sleep.


Book 20

Odysseus lay within the vestibule
atop an unfleshed oxhide, underneath
the fleece of several sheep the suitors killed.
Over the skins Eurynome smoothed a cloak.
His mind contriving suitors’ ruination,
he lay awake while women left the halls—
the maids who often went to bed with suitors—
brazenly giggling, laughing to each other.
The soul inside Odysseus’ chest grew hot
as he considered in his spirit’s depths
whether to rise and deal out death to each
or let them go ahead and sleep with lovers
one final time, although his heart would howl.
As when a female dog with pups will crouch
and snarl, ready to fight an unknown man,
so did he snarl inside at their misdeeds,
but in the end he calmed himself with words:
“Desist, my heart, as you brooked even worse
the day when overwhelming Cyclops ate
my worthy men. You bided time till wits
let you escape the cave where death seemed sure.”
So saying, he gained control of rising fury.
Obediently, his heart remained in check,
steadfast, although his body tossed and turned.
As when one sears a pouch of fat and blood,
rotates it over fire this way and that,
flipping it over, so to speed the cooking,
so did Odysseus twist and flop; he searched
for means by which he could defeat the suitors,
unaided, but at length Athena neared,
disguised in mortal’s form, come down from heaven.
She stood above his head and spoke to him:
“Most sorely tried of men, why are you wakeful?
Your home is here, inside it are your wife
and son—a son that any man would hope for.”
Responding to her, skilled Odysseus stated:
“Goddess, what you just said is on the mark,
but nonetheless my mind must make a plan
how I will best so many shameless suitors,
myself alone, despite their many numbers,
and even more I must consider this:
if I should slay them by your will, and Zeus’s,
to where can I escape? Do think on that.”
The bright-eyed goddess gave him this response:
“Have faith! Another might rely on friends
who are mere mortals, having little wisdom,
but I, a goddess, guard you constantly
when you have need, and I will tell you frankly:
if fifty companies of mortal men
surrounded us, inspired to kill by Ares,
still you would drive away their sheep and oxen.
So calm yourself. It drains a man to watch
all night, and you have ample trials ahead.”
After she scattered sleep upon his eyes,
the brilliant goddess rose to high Olympus
while sleep took hold and freed his heart of cares,
but as sleep eased his mind, his wife awoke.
She sat up on her fleecy bed and wept
until her heart had no more need for tears.
Then—goddesslike—she prayed to Artemis:
“Artemis, hallowed goddess, would that you
could strike my breast with arrows, take my soul
right now, or else that violent winds would seize me,
carry me far across the misty deep
and cast me down in Ocean’s streaming mouth!
As when the storm took off Pandareus’ daughters,
whose parents gods had slain, leaving the girls
orphaned at home, where Aphrodite fed them,
where Hera gave them minds and shapely forms,
where you, unsullied Artemis, made them tall,
and where Athena taught them wondrous skills—
till one day Aphrodite scaled Olympus
to plead that both the girls should blissfully marry—
entreating thunder-lover Zeus, who knows
the good and ill that fate ordains for mortals—
but while she pleaded, storm winds snatched the girls
and gave them to the Furies as handmaids,
just so I wish the gods would make me vanish,
or you would kill me, Artemis, so I
could join Odysseus underneath the earth,
rather than please another, lesser man.
Torment might be endurable for one
who weeps by day with pain inside her breast
but during night takes sleep. Sleep empties minds
of everything when eyelids have been sealed.
But me, a god taunts me with teasing dreams—
last night one came, just like Odysseus looked
the day the army left, and my heart leapt
because I thought him real instead of phantom.”
Her prayer was done, and gold-throned Dawn appeared.
Odysseus heard his wife, her cries and tears,
and as he heard, it seemed within his heart
that she stood at his head and recognized him.
He took the cloak and fleece inside the hall
and laid them on a chair. The oxhide, though,
he carried out the gates, and prayed to Zeus:
“O father Zeus! If over sea and land—
and through much misery—you brought me home,
let someone still awake speak me an omen,
and let there be another, sent yourself!”
That was his prayer, and counselor Zeus paid heed.
He loosed a thunderclap from bright Olympus,
above the clouds. Odysseus’ spirits rose.
Next came an omen from a female miller,
nearby where stood her lord and master’s mills.
A dozen skillful women labored there,
producing healthful wheat and barley flour.
All but the one were sleeping, their work done,
but she—the slowest worker—paused to rest.
She stopped her mill and spoke a word to heaven:
“O father Zeus, who rules both gods and mortals,
your thunder boomed from high in starry skies
that have no clouds. You sent someone a sign,
now grant to lowly me a boon I ask:
let this day be the last on which the wooers
enjoy a feast within Odysseus’ palace!
They wear me down with work, make weak my knees
grinding their flour. Let them now feast their last!”
Odysseus was exultant hearing her
and Zeus’s thunder, portents of revenge.
The other maids throughout Odysseus’ halls
soon woke and lit a fire upon the hearth.
Telemachus arose, a godlike youth.
He dressed himself and buckled on his sword.
He tied fine sandals underneath his feet
and chose a sturdy spear with sharp bronze point.
Outside his door, he spoke to Eurycleia:
“Dear lady, did you venerate our guest
with food and bed, or did he lie neglected,
as might be Mother’s way, wise though she is?
On impulse she has sometimes honored men,
inferior men, and sent away the worthy.”
Attentive Eurycleia said to him:
“Child, do not lay reproach upon the guiltless!
The guest drank wine till he was satisfied,
but would not eat the food your mother offered.
When he had thoughts of lying down to sleep,
she ordered maids to make a bed for him,
but he—a man now used to luckless hardship—
chose not to sleep upon a bed with sheets.
With just an unscraped ox’s skin, a fleece
and cloak a maid threw on, he slept outside.”
At that, Telemachus strode through the halls,
his spear in hand, fleet-footed dogs at heel,
and headed for the ground where men assembled.
The servant maids were roused by Eurycleia—
daughter of Ops, the son of Peisenor:
“Wake up! You maids go sweep the palace floors;
you there, go spread the chairs with clean upholstery,
purple; you scullery girls sponge off the tables,
wipe every one, then clean the mixing bowls
and set out cups; the rest of you draw water—
go to the spring and quickly fetch it home.
The suitors will not be away much longer.
This being a feast day, they will soon arrive.”
The maids heard her commands, and they obeyed.
Twenty set off toward the shady spring.
Others dispersed to clear and clean the palace.
Meanwhile the suitors’ servant men appeared
and split firewood. The water-bearing maids
returned, and in their midst the swineherd walked,
leading the fattest three hogs in his sties.
He left the hogs to eat inside a pen
and cordially addressed his lord Odysseus:
“Stranger, did those Achaeans treat you better,
or did they disrespect you as before?”
Astute Odysseus answered that inquiry:
“The gods should make the miscreants pay, Eumaeus!
They blatantly perform their reckless deeds
in someone else’s halls. They have no shame!”
In such a way they spoke to one another
until goatherd Melanthius approached,
leading the finest goats the flocks contained,
for suitors’ dining pleasure. Two men followed.
He tied the goats before the echoing courtyard,
then mockingly the man addressed Odysseus:
“Stranger, are you still making trouble here,
still begging food, not moved elsewhere to cadge?
Never will I be rid of you, I think,
until you taste my fists. You are disgraceful,
and there are feasts elsewhere for you to haunt.”
Crafty Odysseus held his tongue at that
and simply shook his head while plotting slaughter.
A third man came along, upright Philoetius,
leading a barren ox and three fat goats,
conveyed to Ithaca by ferrymen
(who transport people and such beasts as these).
Philoetius tied the beasts outside the courtyard,
then he approached Eumaeus with a word:
“Swineherd, who is that newcomer, the stranger,
outside the halls? Who does he claim his folk
to be? Of what bloodline, what fatherland?
Poor wretch, he seems to have a monarch’s bearing,
but gods afflict all men who wander far,
ordain them lives of grief though they be kings.”
With that, he stood beside Odysseus, raised
his right hand in salute and said to him:
“Hail, father stranger, may the future see
you prosper! Many ills oppress you now.
O Zeus! No god is more perverse than you!
You do not pity men whom you beget
and introduce to misery, to ruin.
Stranger, when I see you, my eyes grow moist,
reminded of Odysseus, who I picture
wearing torn rags like yours while roaming far,
if he indeed still lives and sees sunlight.
If he has died and entered Hades’ realm,
how sad for me! He trusted me with cows
while I was yet a youth in Cephallenia.
His herd has grown abundant, far beyond
the growth of other strains of broad-browed cattle.
The suitors bade me lead cows here for them
to eat, in disregard of Master’s son.
They have no fear of gods. Their only care
is to exploit my long-gone master’s wealth.
Because of them, the spirit in my chest
is fraught. His son is home, so it seems wrong
for me to take my master’s herd elsewhere,
abroad, yet it is worse to bring them here,
to these usurpers, whom I watch with scorn.
Long since I would have fled this place to serve
a foreign king—so bad have things become—
except I still trust he might yet arrive
and make short work of suitors in his palace.”
Odysseus, wily man, replied to him:
“Herdsman, you do not seem malign or dense,
and I can see that wisdom shapes your thoughts,
so I will speak and swear an oath to you.
Almighty Zeus, now witness! By this table,
and by Odysseus’ hearth where I have sat,
Odysseus will arrive in this, his home,
and your two eyes will see him, if you wish,
killing the suitors who beset his halls!”
Answering that, the cattle herder said:
“Stranger, if only Zeus fulfills your word,
you will observe what powerful hands I have!”
Eumaeus prayed to every deathless god
that shrewd Odysseus soon would reach his hearth.
While those men so conversed among themselves,
the suitors planned Telemachus’ fate and death,
but as they planned, a bird came from the east,
an eagle that flew high and gripped a dove.
Amphinomus addressed the group and said:
“Ah friends, we dare not carry out our plan
to kill Telemachus, so let us eat!”
So spoke Amphinomus, without dispute.
They went inside divine Odysseus’ halls,
cast cloaks aside on tables, chairs or couches,
then slaughtered weighty sheep and fattened goats,
as well as meaty hogs, a single cow.
They roasted and divided entrails. Wine
they mixed in bowls. The swineherd passed out goblets.
Cowherd Philoetius organized the bread
in handsome baskets while Melanthius poured.
The diners stretched their hands toward waiting foods.
Telemachus astutely sat his sire
inside the central hall beside the threshold.
He placed for him a stool, a little table,
offered a share of entrails, poured him drink—
a golden cupful—then he spoke commands:
“Sit here, inside, among these drinking men,
and I will ward away the hands and taunts
of any wooer. This is no common square.
This is Odysseus’ house, and mine as well.
You suitors curb your reprimands, restrain
your hands, else you may rouse discord and fighting!”
When he said that, the suitors bit their lips,
amazed at young Telemachus’ strong speech.
Eventually Antinous spoke up:
“Hard as it is, we must accept his word,
although Telemachus has spoken rudely,
since Zeus did not approve the plan we made
to silence him and end his loud harangues.”
Telemachus ignored Antinous’ speech.
Meanwhile the criers led sacrificial beasts
up through the town, to where townsmen assembled
before Apollo’s shady, sacred grove.
The suitors roasted cuts of meat till done,
allotted portions round, and dined in splendor.
The servers gave a portion to Odysseus,
an equal share they served, obedient to
divine Odysseus’ son Telemachus.
Athena did not let the boastful wooers
desist from painful jibes that would inflame
Laertes’ son Odysseus’ angry heart.
Among the suitors was a loathsome man
who made his home in Same, named Ctesippus.
He put his trust in treasure he possessed,
and wooed the wife Odysseus left behind.
He now addressed his strutting fellow courters:
“Hear what I have to say, you worthy wooers!
That stranger got a serving—properly
an equal share. It would be wrong to stint
a guest whom young Telemachus hosts here,
and I will add a welcoming prize, which he
may give to her who pours his bath, or to
another servant in Odysseus’ palace.”
Asserting that, he threw an ox’s hoof,
picked from a basket, but Odysseus dodged,
inclined his head, and in his heart he smiled,
derisive, as the missile struck the wall.
Telemachus spoke out, rebuked Ctesippus:
“Ctesippus, it is better for your heart
that your throw missed my guest, that he escaped,
else my sharp spear would strike amid your chest.
Your sire would see your funeral, not your wedding,
occurring soon. Let no one in this house
act impolitely. I am now aware
of right and wrong, no longer just a child.
But we have nonetheless endured the sight,
as you drink up our wine, consume our herds
and bread. I am but one against a legion.
You should do me no harm despite your rancor,
but if you mean to kill me now with bronze,
I might prefer that, since I could well choose
to die instead of watching your foul deeds—
mistreating honored guests, and servant maids
whom you have dragged around the palace rooms.”
The listeners were left silent, sitting still,
till Agelaus spoke, Damastor’s son:
“My friends, let no one be annoyed or go
against what he has said, and justly so.
Let there be no abuse of yonder stranger,
or any servant in Odysseus’ halls.
For youth and mother I will offer counsel,
respectfully, in case it may find favor:
as long as there was hope within your chests
that shrewd Odysseus would arrive back home,
no one could mind that you would wait, put off
your suitors here, since that would turn out well
if he indeed were to appear one day,
but after so much time he will not come.
Therefore, Telemachus, command your mother,
tell her to wed the suitor who gives most.
Then you may savor this, your patrimony,
the food, the drink, and let her live elsewhere.”
Telemachus confronted him and said:
“Oh, no! By Zeus, by trials my father had,
roaming and maybe dying far from home!
I do not hinder marriage. I have asked
her to select a man, take gifts from me.
But I would be ashamed to put her out
against her will. May heaven not allow it!”
Pallas Athena roused among the suitors
delirious laughter that deranged their minds:
each thought his laugh came from another’s jaws;
the meat they ate exuded blood; their eyes
filled up with tears; their hearts foresaw lament,
till godlike Theoclymenus declared:
“Poor souls, why do you suffer so? A cloud
obscures your heads, your faces, even knees.
You cry in anguish, tears run down your cheeks!
Blood stains the spotless palace walls and alcoves!
Phantoms beset the entryway and courtyard,
passing to Erebus, the gloom. The sun
has died above, and noisome mist is spreading.”
The suitors laughed the more at what he said.
Polybus’ son Eurymachus spoke next:
“This stranger newly come is but a fool,
so let our youths escort him out the gates
into the market. Here it is like night.”
Good Theoclymenus proclaimed to him:
“Eurymachus, I will not need an escort—
I have my own two eyes, two ears, two feet,
a mind that is in no respect debased—
but I will leave because I think that you
are facing ruin that no one will escape,
none of you suitors in Odysseus’ palace,
presumptuous men who perpetrate rash deeds.”
That said, he walked outside Odysseus’ halls
to those his welcoming friend Piraeus held.
The suitors glanced about at one another
and mocked Telemachus, reviled his guests.
One of the arrogant suitors might declaim:
“Telemachus, unlucky host you are!
See this foul vagabond that you are hosting!
He wants his food, his drink, but does not work
and has no strength—a useless weight on earth.
Your other guest presumed to prophesy.
These pests would not vex us if you heed me:
put both your guests aboard an oar-fit ship
for Sicily, where they will fetch a price.”
Telemachus ignored the suitors’ taunts.
He looked toward his father, waiting quietly,
until they would assail the shameless wooers.
Cautious Penelope, Icarius’ daughter,
sat on a handsome bench outside her door,
from where she heard what every speaker said.
The suitors laughed as they prepared their meal
of many slaughtered beasts—delicious, sating—
but there could be no worse repast than one
a mighty man and goddess were about
to offer those who served up wrong on wrong.


Book 21

Athena put a thought into the mind
of shrewd Penelope, Icarius’ daughter,
to set a bow and irons before the suitors
as prelude to the contest—and the slaughter.
She climbed the tall stairway and reached her chamber.
Her steady hand enclosed a crooked key,
glittering bronze, its handle ivory.
Handmaids in tow, she left her room and reached
remote enclaves—Odysseus’ treasure stores
of bronze, of gold, of ornamental iron.
Among those lay his pliant bow, his quiver
and countless groan-producing feathered shafts,
gifts of Odysseus’ host in Lacedaemon,
Eurytus’ son Iphitus, like a god.
The two men met each other in Messene,
fiery Ortilochus’ land, the time Odysseus
went to recoup what people owed his folk.
Messenians looted stock from Ithaca,
took herders and three hundred head by ship.
On that account Odysseus traveled there
while still a youth, selected by the elders.
He met Iphitus, searching for lost mares—
twelve mares, and each one nursed a steady mule.
They proved to bring about Iphitus’ death
when envied by a mighty son of Zeus,
the mortal, feat-performing Heracles,
who, while Iphitus was his houseguest, killed him,
respecting neither gods’ will nor the feast
he laid before Iphitus. He killed the man
and kept the strong-hoofed mares among his stock.
Before that, though, Iphitus met Odysseus,
and gave to him the bow Eurytus used
until he died and left it to his son.
In turn, Odysseus gave a sword and spear
to launch their friendship, but they never saw
each other’s homes before the son of Zeus
murdered Eurytus’ godlike son Iphitus.
Odysseus kept the bow Iphitus gave,
but did not take the bow away to war.
Respectful of Iphitus’ cherished friendship,
he left the bow behind to use when home.
Penelope approached the treasure room,
stopped on the oak threshold, which once a builder
smoothed and aligned with skill to match his level,
then fitted doorposts, hung the polished doors.
She quickly took the latch thong off its hook,
thrust the key through a hole to reach the bolt
and slid it back. A roar arose, like bulls
grazing in fields—so roared those wondrous portals
opening wide when she applied the key.
She walked straight to a platform where great chests
were placed, in each of which lay fragrant garments.
She reached and lifted off its peg the bow,
contained within its shiny fitted case.
She sat down where she stood, case on her lap,
removed her husband’s bow and burst out weeping.
When she had had enough lament and wails,
she went among the suitors in the great hall,
the pliant bow in hand. She held a quiver,
packed full of feathered shafts, each charged with pain.
Behind, her handmaids brought a chest of iron
and bronze, her husband’s archery practice gear.
When she arrived among the men, she stopped
beside a sturdy roof-supporting column,
holding a glistening veil across her cheeks,
a trusty handmaid close by either side,
and straightaway addressed the suitors, saying:
“Listen to me, my suitors in this room!
You crave to eat and drink—continually—
the goods of one long gone! The only thing
throughout the years that you have asked of me
is to become the wife of one of you.
Come, suitors, then, a contest will decide.
Odysseus’ powerful bow I will place here.
Whichever one of you shall string this bow
and shoot an arrow through yon dozen axes,
him will I follow, giving up this house,
my lovely bridal home, well stocked with goods.
Forever will I see it in my dreams.”
That said, she told the staunch swineherd Eumaeus
to place the bow and axes by the suitors.
Eumaeus, tearful, set the pieces down;
the cowherd wept to see his master’s bow.
Scornful Antinous reviled both men:
“You silly bumpkins dwell in times long past!
Why do you wretches cascade tears, arouse
the woman’s heart, a heart that has enough
to grieve about already—husband lost.
Sit quietly while you eat, or out the door
you go to wail, but leave the bow inside,
to test the suitors’ skill. I do not think
that polished bow will easily be strung,
since there is not a man among us wooers
such as Odysseus was. I saw him once.
I was a child, but I recall him well.”
Despite his words, at heart he harbored hope
that he would string the bow, shoot through the irons,
but he would be the first to taste a barb
Odysseus shot because he scandalized
the halls, encouraged fellow suitors’ wrongs.
Telemachus, however, spoke among them:
“Ah me, the son of Cronus drives me mad!
My cherished mother, usually wise, has said
that she will leave these halls with one of you.
My wits are gone, so I am cheered and laugh.
Now come, you suitors, take the offered prize!
There is no woman like her in Achaea,
or sacred Pylos, Argos or Mycenae,
or any mainland realm, or Ithaca!
But you know that. Why need I praise my mother?
Well, then, let no excuse delay the bow,
delay its stringing. We are keen to see.
Why, even I myself may have a try!
If I should shoot an arrow through the irons,
I would not need to feel the pain of Mother
leaving with one of you, and I would stand
to claim my father’s prizes for myself!”
With that, he cast aside his purple cloak,
unshouldered his sharp sword and stood up tall.
He dug a trench in which he stood the axes—
a single trench—aligned them with taut string,
and packed firm dirt around. Onlookers marveled:
the youth could not have seen his father do it.
He stood beside the door and tried the bow.
Three times he strained to bend the lively weapon.
Three times his strength let down his fervent hope
to hook the string and shoot through all axe heads.
He would have strung the bow in one more try
had not Odysseus signaled him to stop.
Telemachus addressed the men again:
“Shameful, I am too weak to do this task,
or else too young. I cannot trust my hands
to ward off men who seek to do me harm.
But come, you men who have more strength than I,
string up the bow and carry out the contest.”
Shat said, he stood the bow upon the ground,
propped it against the doorway’s polished planks,
leaned his arrow against the portal’s handle,
and sat down on the chair from which he rose.
Eupeithes’ son Antinous proclaimed:
“Comrades, stand up in turn from left to right,
beginning at the place where wine is poured.”
Antinous’ proposal pleased them all.
The first to stand was Oenops’ son Leodes,
the suitors’ seer, who always sat far back
beside the wine bowl. Wanton acts to him
were wrong, so he disliked the other suitors.
He was the first of them to take the challenge.
He stood beside the door and tried the bow.
Before he got it strung, his hands gave out,
his tender hands, whereat he told the suitors:
“I cannot string it. Let another try.
This bow will leave our finest men unstrung,
their hearts and spirits crushed. Better for us
to perish, rather than to live without
what we have waited for these endless days.
Now some of you still harbor heartfelt hope
to wed Penelope, Odysseus’ wife,
but when you fail the bow’s demanding test,
seek out another fair Achaean lass
to court with bridal gifts, a woman who
will wed the man her destiny decrees.”
Having said that, he put the bow aside,
propped it against the doorway’s polished planks.
He leaned the arrow on the portal’s handle
and sat down on the chair from which he rose.
Antinous accosted him, rebuking:
“What sort of speech flew past your teeth, Leodes?
Hard to endure, and I resent your claim
that yonder bow will thwart our finest men,
their hearts, their souls, because you failed to string it.
Truth is, your mother did not bear a man
with strength to draw a bow and shoot an arrow!
But other worthy suitors will now do it.”
Shat said, he told goatherd Melanthius:
“Kindle a blaze within the hall, Melanthius;
beside it set a bench, a woolly fleece,
and fetch a heavy wheel of tallow, hardened,
so these young men can warm and rub the bow
with fat. That done, we shall complete the contest.”
Selanthius straightway lit insatiate fire,
beside it dragged a bench, a woolly fleece,
and fetched a heavy wheel of hardened tallow.
The suitors heated the bow, but still they failed
to string it. None had near the strength required.
Antinous and Eurymachus held back,
the suitors’ leaders, easily the strongest.
A pair had walked outside the house together—
divine Odysseus’ swine and cattle herders.
Right after them Odysseus walked himself.
After the three passed through the gates and courtyard,
Odysseus spoke to them in gentle tones:
“Cowherd, swineherd, should I confide in you
or keep my secrets? My heart bids me speak!
Would you support Odysseus if he came
here now, transported swiftly by some god?
Would you side with Odysseus or the suitors?
Respond according to your hearts’ dictates!”
The man whose skill was herding cows exclaimed:
“O Zeus, if only you would grant my wish
for him to come, for gods to guide him here,
you would soon see my strength, my willing hands.”
Sn such a vein Eumaeus begged more gods
to send Odysseus back into his halls.
Odysseus recognized their honest minds,
and in response he spoke to them again:
“I am the man! I suffered countless ills,
but in the twentieth year I have come home!
I know you two have wished for my return,
but not another servant did I hear
say prayer that I would make it home again.
Now I will tell you two how matters stand:
if gods grant me to kill the strutting suitors,
I will give each of you a wife and wealth,
and build you homes near mine. From that time on,
Telemachus’ friends and brothers you will be.
Come here, and I will show you certain proof
so you will know me, trust me in your hearts:
the scar where once the boar’s white tusk ripped in.
Autolycus’ sons and I were on Parnassus.”
He drew his rags aside, exposed the great scar.
The two observed, they recognized it well
and, weeping, threw their arms around Odysseus.
Welcoming him, they kissed his head, his shoulders,
and he likewise kissed them, their hands, their heads.
The sun would have gone down while they still wept
had not Odysseus called a halt and said:
“Now we must hold our sobs lest someone see
and spread the word to those within the palace.
Let us go back inside, one at a time:
I first, you after. Let this be our cue:
when shameless, swaggering suitors in the hall
refuse to let me have the bow and quiver,
then you, Eumaeus, take them through the room
and place them in my hands. Command the maids
to lock the great hall’s heavy, tight-fit portals.
Instruct them: if they hear men falling, groaning—
the men we have confined—avoid the doors,
stay back, stay quiet, look to their handiwork.
The courtyard gates will be your charge, Philoetius.
Slide home the bolt and quickly tie it fast.”
That said, he went inside his airy halls
and sat upon the bench from which he rose.
Soon afterward his two allies appeared.
Eurymachus now had the bow. He turned it,
warmed it before the fire, but still he failed
to string it, whereupon he groaned, heartfelt,
and disappointed though he was, he spoke:
“Now more than ever do I feel regret,
and not so much for want of winning marriage.
Achaean girls abound. Enough are here
in wave-encompassed Ithaca, and elsewhere.
The worst is that we do not have the strength
even to bend and string Odysseus’ bow—
disgrace that people not yet born will speak of.”
Eupeithes’ son Antinous responded:
“You know that is not so, Eurymachus.
The people now attend Apollo’s fete,
a holy time, no time for stringing bows.
Put it aside, and let us leave the axes
standing in place. I think no one will take them,
robbing Laertes’ son Odysseus’ great hall.
Come, then, and let the steward wet our cups
so we can pour and leave the bow for now.
Come dawn, direct goatherd Melanthius
to bring the choicest goats his flocks contain
so we can give the archer god their thighs,
then try the bow once more and end the contest.”
Antinous’ proposition pleased his fellows.
The heralds bathed the suitors’ hands in water,
while young men poured the wine bowls full of drink
and put in every cup a small amount.
Libations poured, the suitors drank their fill,
and sly Odysseus spoke, deceiving them:
“Hear me, you glorious, far-famed suitor-kings,
so I may tell you what my heart commands!
Eurymachus, and more, Antinous
I do entreat, since he just now proposed
to put the bow aside, in heaven’s hands.
Come dawn, the god may grant the strength he wants.
But let me have the polished bow so I
may test my hands, my strength—whether today
the might of old remains in these bent limbs,
or has it waned from roving and neglect.”
The suitors balked, recoiled at what he said,
afraid that he indeed might string the bow.
Antinous rejoined, reviling him:
“You wretched stranger! You have little sense!
Do you not take your ease among us nobles,
and feast, and get your share, and listen in
on what we have to say? Just you alone—
of begging strangers—overhears our talk.
The wine has softened you, as wine has oft
entangled one who cannot hold his drink.
For one, renowned Eurytion the centaur,
who grew befuddled in Pirithous’ halls
after he mystified his mind with wine.
He went berserk and wrecked Pirithous’ home
till outraged warriors rose and dragged him through
the entryway, the gates, where they sheared off
his ears and nose. His mind impaired by drink,
he staggered thence, lightheaded, wrecked by folly.
From that day on, centaurs and mortals fought,
their strife begun in heavy use of liquor.
So will I see you suffer if you string
that bow. You will encounter no reward
among our folk. Instead, aboard a ship
we will send you to brutal King Echetus,
whence you will not escape. So be at ease,
drink up, and do not rival younger men!”
Cautious Penelope replied to him:
“Antinous, it is unjust to scold
the guests Telemachus may entertain.
How could you think that if he strings the bow—
relying on his hands, what strength he has—
he could conduct me home to be his wife?
He has no thought himself that such might be,
and none of you should fret on that account,
as your concern would be unjustified.”
Polybus’ son Eurymachus told her:
“Icarius’ daughter, wise Penelope,
we do not think that he would lead you off.
We fear the shame if men and women talk.
Achaean folk should not be heard to say
that lesser men who wooed a noble’s wife
could not so much as string his polished bow,
but yet a vagabond who wandered here
strung up the bow and shot through twelve axe heads.
They might say that and heap contempt on us.”
So that remark, Penelope replied:
“Eurymachus, the folk do not think well
of you who eat away the livelihood
of one your better. What have you to lose?
Besides, our guest is tall, of sturdy build,
and claims to be a son of noble stock,
so give the man the bow and let us see.
I will say this, and this will come to pass:
if he should string the bow, Apollo willing,
I will provide him raiment—tunic, cloak—
a sharpened spear—defense from dogs or men—
a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet
before I send him where he wants to go.”
Astute Telemachus did not approve:
“Mother, no one controls this bow as I do,
with power to give to whom I please, or not,
not any chief on rocky Ithaca
or other isle off Elis’ pastured shore.
None has the strength to stop me if I choose
to give my guest the bow, a gift to keep.
Go in your living quarters, tend your work,
the loom and shuttle; bid your servant maids
perform their duties. Leave the bow to men,
especially to me who rules this house.”
Penelope walked toward her rooms, amazed,
taking to heart the words her son had spoken.
She climbed the stairs, her servant maids behind,
and mourned her cherished man Odysseus till
Athena shed sweet sleep upon her eyelids.
Meantime the swineherd took the crescent bow
as outraged suitors through the halls inveighed.
An overbearing youth might fulminate:
“Where do you take that bow, you wretched swineherd?
Why, soon the dogs you bred among your pigs
will eat you, far from humans, if Apollo,
or any deathless god, should favor us!”
So railed the suitors till he dropped the bow,
afraid because so many cries rang out.
Telemachus, however, shouted loudly:
“Pick up that bow, old sir, pay them no heed
else I, though young, may drive you out the door
amid a hail of stones. I am more mighty.
If only I had might exceeding that
of all the suitors who infest this palace,
soon I would sternly send them on their way
out of my home, where they concoct foul schemes.”
They laughed aloud at what the young man said,
and merriment eased the suitors’ hateful rage.
Up through the hall the swineherd took the bow
and placed it in Odysseus’ waiting hands.
Odysseus straightway told his aged nurse:
“Telemachus bids you, wise Eurycleia,
to lock this hall, lock every tight-fit portal.
If you should hear the sounds of thuds and groans
from here where we have men penned up, avoid
the doors and quietly stay beside your work.”
She quietly acquiesced in his command.
She locked the doors, the exit from the hall.
Philoetius had unnoticed gone outside
and locked the well-constructed courtyard gates.
Beneath the portico lay vessels’ hawsers,
with which he lashed the gates. He then returned
and sat upon the bench from which he rose,
eyes on Odysseus, who held up the bow,
lifted it high, examined every inch
lest worms had drilled the horn while he was gone.
The suitors watched, and one might tell another:
“See how the fox inspects the bow, its limbs!
Either he has one like it stashed somewhere,
or else he plans to make one, judged by how
the beggar turns it now this way, now that.”
Snother arrogant suitor might respond:
“I hope his luck will be no better then
than when he tries to string the one he holds.”
Adroit Odysseus, while the suitors talked,
completed his perusal of the weapon.
As might a man, master of lyre and song,
easily stretch a new string on his lyre,
grasping the twisted gut at either end,
so did Odysseus easily string the bow.
His right hand plucked and tested out the string,
which sang as lovely as a swallow’s voice.
The suitors quailed, and panic caused their skins
to blanch. Zeus loudly thundered his portent.
Long-suffering divine Odysseus grinned
when devious Cronus’ son revealed that omen.
He grasped the shaft that lay atop a table—
the bulk remained inside their hollow quiver,
the arrows that the suitors soon would taste.
Around the string he fit the arrow’s notch,
and right from where he sat, he let it fly.
It did not fail to pass through any axe head:
the bronze-tipped shaft flew through the first, then all,
and reached the doors. Odysseus told his son:
“Telemachus, your guest caused you no shame.
No target did I miss, nor was the bow
so hard to string. My might remains intact,
not as these suitors claimed, reviling me.
Now is the time for us to serve a meal,
though still daylight, and afterward indulge
in song and lyre, which culminate a feast!”
He gave a nod. His son strapped on his sword,
Telemachus, Odysseus’ cherished child.
He wrapped his fingers round his spear and stood
beside his father, armed with bright sharp bronze.


Book 22

Now protean Odysseus shed his rags,
leapt to the threshold holding bow and quiver
abrim with arrows, which he emptied out,
dumped at his feet, proclaiming to the suitors:
“Thus will the baleful contest reach its end:
a target no man ever hit till now—
but if Apollo grants my prayer, I will.”
He loosed a bitter barb toward Antinous,
who was about to raise a glittering cup—
two-handled, gold. He had it in his hands,
ready to drink its wine. No thought of death
concerned him. Why should he suspect that one
among the feasting men, however mighty,
would send to him black fate and gruesome doom?
Odysseus’ powerful arrow struck his throat;
the point passed through the pliant, yielding neck.
Antinous leaned, his hand released the chalice,
and right away his nose began to spout
his mortal blood. The table, then, he struck,
tipped with a kick, and food cascaded down,
befouling bread and meat. The suitors howled
throughout the hall to see a falling man.
Around the room they sprang from plush armchairs.
Thoroughly they scanned the sturdy walls,
but there was not a shield or spear to grab.
Instead, with furious words they lashed Odysseus:
“Stranger, you shot a man! Your last contest
is finished, done! Your death is certain now!
The man whom you just killed was far the best
young Ithacan, and you are vulture food!”
The suitors thought Odysseus did not mean
to kill the man. They failed to apprehend
that he would rain destruction on them all.
Adroit Odysseus scowled at them and said:
“You curs! You trusted I would not come home
from Troy to find that you have drained my wealth,
imposed yourselves upon my servant maids,
pursued my wife while I was yet alive,
showed no regard for gods who hold the heavens,
and none for future mortals yet unborn.
For those transgressions, each of you will die!”
At that, skin-blanching terror seized the suitors,
and each man glanced about for means of flight.
Only Eurymachus replied to him:
“If you are he, Odysseus home again,
what you just said is apt, since I admit
to numerous wanton acts within your realm.
But yonder lies the man responsible,
Antinous, who brought these things to pass,
and not because he sought unneeded marriage,
but rather something else that Zeus forbade:
to be the king, to reign in Ithaca,
and to that end he tried to kill your son.
Antinous is dead, so spare the rest,
and we will make it up to you hereafter,
repay you for the food and drink we took.
Each man will bring the worth of twenty cows
in bronze or gold, enough so that your wrath
will ease. Till then we understand your rage.”
Beneath a frown, Odysseus answered him:
“If each of you should give me all his wealth,
what you now have and what you might obtain,
not even then would I refrain from slaughter,
not till I take revenge on every suitor.
Your only options now are fight or try
to flee, whoever would avoid his death,
but I think none of you will sidestep ruin.”
She words caused every knee and heart to quake,
and soon Eurymachus spoke out again:
“Ah friends, the man will never stay his hand.
No, while he holds the polished bow, the quiver,
he will assail us from the door till all
of us are dead. So let us think of fighting!
Unsheathe your swords, and hold the tables up
against his flying shafts. Drive hard at him
together, force him back beside the doors
so we can get to town and raise alarm.
That archer will have shot his final arrow!”
Having said that, Eurymachus drew his sword—
both edges sharpened bronze—and lunged ahead
with fearsome shouts. Odysseus did not fail
to loose a barb that hit the mark, a nipple,
drove on into his liver, caused his hand
to drop the sword. He sprawled across a table,
bent over double, knocked aside the food
and cup before he hit the floor face-first
in agony. In final throes his feet
battered a chair as darkness cloaked his eyes.
Amphinomus was next to charge Odysseus,
leaping to face him, unsheathed sword held out
in case Odysseus might give ground. Too late.
Telemachus’ bronze spear impaled his back,
between the shoulders, driving through his chest.
Amphinomus fell; his forehead slapped the floor.
Telemachus backed off and left his spear
stuck in Amphinomus. He feared the suitors
should he remain and wrestle with the weapon.
One might dart near with sword in hand and strike.
He ran and quickly reached his father’s side,
where he stood breathlessly and spoke to him:
“Father, I can bring you two spears, a shield,
a helmet, bronze, to fit about your temples,
and I will arm myself, and arm the swineherd,
cowherd as well. If armed, we will fare better.”
Answering him, astute Odysseus said:
“Run get them while I have some arrows left,
else they may force me back and reach the doors!”
Telemachus obeyed his father’s charge
and hastened to the room that hid the arms.
From there he carried back eight spears, four shields
and four bronze helmets topped with horses’ tails.
He reached his father’s side and set those down.
Telemachus was first to dress in bronze,
then both the herders put fine armor on,
and all three stood by masterful Odysseus.
As long as his supply of arrows held,
Odysseus cut down suitor after suitor,
taking his aim, till they collapsed in heaps.
But when his final arrow left his string,
he placed the bow beside the hall’s doorpost,
stood it on end, propped against the wall.
Across his back he strapped a shield—four oxhides.
Over his mighty head he drew a helmet,
atop which waved a dreadful horsetail crest.
He grasped a pair of sturdy bronze-tipped spears.
The well-built wall contained a smaller doorway,
set in the great hall’s farthermost recess.
A door securely fit there led outside,
and that Odysseus bade the swineherd guard.
The guarded space had room for just one foe.
Among the suitors, Agelaus spoke:
“Friends, will no one approach that farther door,
take word outside and raise the hue and cry?
Then would that man have shot his final arrow!”
Melanthius, the goatherd, answered him:
“No one is apt to get through, Agelaus,
either the larger doors or farther passage,
where even one brave man can block us all.
So look, let me bring arms for you to wear,
from in the upper room where I believe
Odysseus and his frenzied son have hid them.”
That said, goatherd Melanthius wended up
through corridors until he found the chamber.
He brought down shields and spears, a dozen each,
as many helmets, bronze with horsetail crests,
and, moving fast, he gave the arms to suitors.
Odysseus felt his knees and heart grow weak
as he observed them arming, choosing spears
to brandish. Seeing momentous peril loom,
he urgently addressed Telemachus:
“Son, either a servant wench, a palace maid,
is threatening us, or else Melanthius is.”
Alert Telemachus replied to him:
“The fault is mine, sir. No one else is there
to blame. I left the chamber’s solid doors
standing ajar, and suitor spies were watching.
Eumaeus, go secure the armory
and take note if a woman did this deed,
or if it was Melanthius, as I think.”
In such a way the three allies conversed
when suddenly goatherd Melanthius entered,
carrying yet more arms. The swineherd saw
and straightway notified Odysseus, saying:
“Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
that traitorous man again, as I suspected,
went to your armor room. Give me your orders.
Should I cut down the scum, if I can manage,
or bring him here, let you avenge his crimes,
the many he devised inside your halls?”
Ever-alert Odysseus answered him:
“Telemachus and I will keep the suitors,
however furious they may be, at bay.
You two take him. Bend back his arms, his legs.
Inside the armor room, tie boards behind him,
fasten a braided cord around his body
and hoist him up a column, near a roof beam,
where he will be in pain until he dies.”
The two men heard and followed his command.
They neared the armor chamber undetected.
Their prey sought still more armor in far corners.
They lay in wait, each one beside a doorpost,
until goatherd Melanthius crossed the threshold.
He held a gleaming helmet in one hand,
the other held an ancient dusty shield,
the shield Laertes carried when a youth,
but now it lay unused, its seams undone.
The two sprang out and seized the man. They dragged him,
gripping his hair, and threw him on the floor.
In painful bonds they tied his hands and feet,
bent them behind his back as ordered by
Laertes’ much-enduring son Odysseus.
They fastened braided cord around his body,
hoisted him up a column, near the roof beams,
and you, swineherd Eumaeus, mocked him, saying:
“Melanthius, you shall keep the watch all night!
Enjoy a bed as soft as you deserve!
And when the early one comes up from Ocean,
you will see her—the hour when you would lead
choice goats in here to be the suitors’ feast!”
With that, they left him tied in painful bondage
while they put armor on, secured the doors
and ran to join Odysseus, fierce, inflamed.
The four stood at the doorway, breathing fury,
four men against the suitors, many still.
Beside the four came Zeus’s child Athena,
her form and voice resembling those of Mentor.
At sight of her, Odysseus grinned and said:
“Mentor, help us! Recall your once-dear friend
who did you service! We were young together.”
Sespite his words, he knew it was Athena.
Across the hall the suitors raised a yowl,
and Agelaus was the first to scold:
“Mentor, do not fulfill Odysseus’ hope
that you will bolster him by fighting suitors,
since here is what will happen if you do:
when we have slain those men, the son and father,
you will die next for what you proved too keen
to do inside these halls. Your head will pay,
and after we have sapped your might with bronze,
we will combine the wealth that you possess
with what Odysseus had. No son of yours
will stay at home alive, nor will your daughters
or loyal wife reside in Ithaca.”
Sis words stirred anger in Athena’s heart,
and she rebuked Odysseus in response:
“Odysseus, you no longer show the grit
that you displayed when fighting nine long years
with Trojans over white-armed, high-born Helen,
killing a host of men in furious war
till—by your plan—the streets of Troy were won.
Now that you reached your halls, your goods, can you
be less than brave and quail before these suitors?
Stand where I am, old friend, observe my deeds,
and you will learn how, faced with enemies,
Alcimus’ son Mentor repays his friends.”
She did not guarantee they would prevail,
since there were tests to come, of strength, of valor,
for both Odysseus and his glorious son.
The goddess shot up to the smoke-blacked roof beam
and perched in swallow’s form where she could watch.
When Agelaus spoke to goad the courters—
Amphimedon, Eurynomus, Demoptolemus,
Polyctor’s son Pisander, Polybus.
They were by far the best, the bravest suitors
of those who yet remained alive to fight,
having survived the bow and flights of arrows.
Where they could hear him, Agelaus cried:
“My friends, that man will now restrain his hand.
Mentor has gone, his empty boasts delivered,
so they stand at the outer doors, unaided.
The suitors should not cast their spears at once.
We six should throw ours first, and Zeus perhaps
will let us hit Odysseus, win the glory!
His allies will not matter once he drops.”
As he proposed, the six men set their spears
in flight; Athena steered each spear to naught.
One flew and struck the great hall’s heavy doorpost,
another hit the tightly fitted doors,
another’s weighty bronze tip rammed the wall.
After Odysseus’ men escaped the casts,
the much-enduring hero spoke to them:
“My friends, I say to you now comes our turn
to cast our spears at those who badly want
to slaughter us and outdo previous wrongs.”
At that, the allies’ sharp-tipped spears took wing.
Odysseus took down Demoptolemus;
Telemachus killed Euryades; the swineherd
killed Elatus; the cowherd felled Pisander.
The victims’ teeth clenched on unyielding stone.
Remaining suitors drew back in a corner;
the four allies retrieved their spears from corpses.
Now once again the suitors lofted spears,
and once again Athena made them useless.
Again one flew and hit the great hall’s doorpost,
another struck the tightly fitted doors,
another’s heavy bronze tip rammed the wall.
Amphimedon’s just grazed Telemachus’ wrist,
the bronze point tearing only outer skin.
Ctesippus’ long spear topped Eumaeus’ shield
and nicked his shoulder, then flew idly on.
Next those around Odysseus once again
cast sharpened spears among the suitors’ group.
This time Odysseus killed Eurydamas;
Telemachus struck Amphimedon; the swineherd
killed Polybus; the cowherd slew Ctesippus,
spearing his chest, and stood above him taunting:
“Polytherses’ son, who loved to mock, no more
will you speak wanton barbs! No, to the gods
commit your speech, those who are far more mighty!
This spear requites the hoof you once threw at
Odysseus while he begged here in this hall!”
So spoke the cattleherd. Odysseus, meantime,
took Agelaus out, a spear at close range.
Telemachus assaulted Leocritus,
a spear amid his belly, driven through,
and he fell flat, face smashed on cold, hard stone.
Athena raised and waved her fateful aegis
beneath the roof, which shook the suitors’ minds.
They raced about as might a herd of cows,
stampeding when attacked by stubborn gadflies
in springtime when the longer days begin.
But as when sharp-beaked vultures, crooked-taloned,
descend from hills to pounce on smaller birds
and drive them terrified across a plain
until the vultures wipe them out, helpless,
no place to hide, while country folk look on,
so did Odysseus’ band assail the suitors,
on left, on right, till ceaseless groans arose
from stricken heads, and blood pooled on the floor.
Leodes rushed and clasped Odysseus’ knees.
He pleaded with him using desperate words:
“Odysseus, sir, I beg you, show me mercy!
I never slighted women in your halls,
by either word or deed. I told those men,
the suitors, they should stop their wanton acts,
but they would not obey me, end their wrongs.
So let a wretched fate be theirs, deserved.
But I was nothing more than their soothsayer,
and yet my innocence gets no reward!”
Beneath a frown, astute Odysseus said:
“If as you claim you were the suitors’ prophet,
here in these halls you likely often prayed
that my homecoming day would be far off,
so you could have my wife and sire her children.
Therefore you will not cheat accursed death!”
With that, his sturdy hand picked up the sword
that lay where Agelaus let it fall
when killed. He struck Leodes’ neck sideways,
the head still speaking as it plunged in dust.
Escaping death was Terpis’ son, the singer
Phemius, whom the suitors forced to play.
With clear-toned lyre in hand, he stood aghast
beside the farthest door. He had two minds:
should he go out by mighty Zeus’s altar,
built in the court, and wait where many times
Odysseus and Laertes burned ox thighs,
or should he clasp Odysseus’ knees and plead?
At length he thought the wiser plan would be
to clasp Laertes’ son Odysseus’ legs.
He set his hollow lyre upon the floor
between a bowl and silver-studded chair.
He crept toward Odysseus, clasped his knees
and pleaded with him using urgent words:
“I beg you, sir, respect and pity me!
You will regret it if you kill a singer,
a man who entertains both men and gods.
I taught myself the lyre, but heaven gives
me songs to sing, and I could sing to you
as to a god, so be not quick to kill!
Your son Telemachus would verify
that never did I want—nor did I like—
to be among the suitors, sing for them.
They used their greater might and coerced me.”
Telemachus, who overheard him speak,
straightway approached his father, whom he told:
“Hold off! Lest you lay waste a guiltless man!
And we should spare Medon—who never failed
to care for me while I was growing up—
unless by now the cow- or swineherd killed him,
or you yourself, rampaging through your halls.”
Medon picked up the mention of his name,
huddling beneath a chair, concealed by oxhide,
recently skinned, in hopes of dodging fate.
He roused himself, cast off the ox’s skin,
raced to Telemachus, embraced his knees
and, agitated, pleaded with the youth:
“Forbear, old friend! And tell your sire the same,
else he may rashly slaughter me with bronze,
inflamed against the suitors who consumed
the goods within his halls, and slighted you!”
Odysseus smiled and reassured Medon:
“Fear not! Telemachus will spare your life,
so you will know—and caution other men—
that worthy deeds, not foul, bring men reward.
Go now, sit down beyond the great hall’s doors—
beside the singer—clear of gore and blood,
while I conclude what I must do in here.”
That said, he started walking through the hall.
The two sat out by mighty Zeus’s altar,
nervous and wary, fearful death would strike.
Odysseus searched the room in case some man
was lying low, alive, to cheat black fate,
but every suitor sprawled in blood and dust
where he had fallen. As when fishermen
have dragged their catch out on the gray sea’s shore,
hauled in their far-flung nets, the captured fish
lie piled on sand, yearning for salty surf,
till Helios’ rays have taken life away,
so were the suitors’ bodies piled in heaps.
Able Odysseus told his worthy son:
“Telemachus, go summon Eurycleia
so I can tell her what is on my mind.”
Telemachus obeyed his father’s word,
threw wide a door and said to Eurycleia:
“Bestir yourself, time-honored nurse, in charge
of servant maids who populate these halls!
My father bids you come and hear him speak!”
She quietly acquiesced in his command,
crossed through the doors into the oft-used great hall
and made her way behind Telemachus.
She found Odysseus, tall among the corpses,
besmeared with blood and gore. As when a lion
devours an ox, then leaves his hiding place,
his chest and cheeks both sides completely drenched
with blood, his face a terror to behold,
so blood-smeared was Odysseus’ body then.
But when the nurse observed the blood, the bodies,
she would have launched a joyous celebration.
Odysseus, though, restrained her eagerness,
and he addressed a stern command to her:
“Exult, old nurse, but quietly in your heart.
Boasting above the slain may anger gods.
The gods brought on these deaths, requiting sins.
These suitors did not honor any man
who came to them, not nobles, not the wretched.
Their wantonness invited dismal fates.
Come now, relate to me which household maids
have failed to honor me and which are guiltless.”
His dear nurse Eurycleia answered him:
“All right, my child, I will tell you the truth.
Within your halls are fully fifty women,
maidservants I myself once taught to work
at combing wool, accepting servitude.
Of those, a dozen crossed the bounds, transgressed.
They scorned Penelope as well as me.
Telemachus being young, your loyal queen
would not let him take charge of household women.
I will go up now to the mistress’ room
and tell your wife. A god helped her to sleep.”
Adroit Odysseus did not acquiesce:
“Do not wake her just yet. Go bring the maids
to me, the women who have misbehaved.”
At that, the aged nurse went through the rooms
and spread the word that certain maids were summoned.
Odysseus then convened Telemachus,
the swineherd and the cowherd. Those he told:
“Order the maids to take the corpses out,
then clean the handsome chairs, the tabletops,
with porous sponges, dipped and soaked in water.
After the house is decently restored,
conduct the maids outside the well-built halls,
between the pergola and courtyard fence.
There take sharp swords and set upon the women
till gone is life and thought of Aphrodite,
who guided them to lie in trysts with suitors.”
The maids in question entered all together.
They wailed aloud, they poured forth heartfelt tears,
but nonetheless they carried corpses out
and put them in the courtyard’s colonnade,
piling them high. Odysseus oversaw them,
kept them on pace as they removed the bodies.
That done, the women cleansed the chairs and tables
with porous sponges, dipped and soaked in water.
Telemachus, the swineherd and the cowherd
together scoured the great hall’s thick-laid floor
with shovels. Women took away the offal.
After the three had seen the hall set right,
they led the maids outside the well-built halls,
between the pergola and courtyard fence,
a narrow space that offered no escape.
Alert Telemachus began by saying:
“I will not take your lives with easy deaths,
you who have heaped revilement on my head—
and Mother’s head—by sleeping with the suitors.”
That said, he took a rope—ship’s rigging once—
and tied it to a sturdy pergola beam,
up high so no maid’s feet could reach the ground.
As when a long-winged timid dove or thrush
is captured, snared within a leafy shrub
where she would roost but finds her final sleep,
so did the women, one by one, with heads
in nooses round their necks die miserably.
Their feet twitched just a moment, not for long.
The three men led Melanthius through the court.
They cut away his nose and ears with bronze,
tore off his genitals for dogs to chew
and, furious, severed off his feet and arms.
The three men washed their bloody hands, their feet,
and went inside the halls, their tasks discharged.
Meanwhile Odysseus told nurse Eurycleia:
“Bring fire and sulphur, nurse, the cures for filth,
so I may cleanse my hall. Then you go tell
Penelope to come and bring her handmaids.
Bid every servant maid within to come.”
Sis dear nurse Eurycleia said to him:
“Well spoken, child, and these things shall I do,
but first I will bring clothes, a cloak and tunic,
else rags alone will cover your broad shoulders,
which some within your halls might find offensive.”
Snswering her, astute Odysseus said:
“But first of all I want to have the fire.”
Sis dear nurse Eurycleia did not balk.
She brought him fire, brought sulphur, with which he
thoroughly cleansed the hall and court outside.
The old nurse went throughout the palace rooms
to rouse the maids and pass the word to come.
They came straightway with torches held aloft
and crowded round Odysseus, glad to see him.
Welcoming him, they kissed his head, his shoulders,
and clasped his hands. He felt a sweet desire
to sigh and weep: he recognized them all.


Book 23

The old nurse climbed the stairs, exultant, laughing,
to tell her mistress that her husband came.
She stumbled as her knees outpaced her feet.
Standing above her mistress’ head, she spoke:
“Get up, Penelope, dear child, and see
with your own eyes the man you daily longed for.
Divine Odysseus made it home at last!
He slew the swaggering suitors—on your house
a plague—who ate your cows and cowed your son.”
Penelope replied in disbelief:
“Dear nurse, the gods have struck you mad. They can,
if they desire, befuddle brilliant minds,
or transform indiscretion into prudence.
They have touched you, who had good sense before.
Why do you taunt me, sorrowful as I am,
by saying outlandish things and spoiling sleep,
which just had fallen on my weary eyelids?
I have not slept so well since my Odysseus
left me to siege that town I will not name.
Now you go down again into the hall.
If any servant maid besides yourself
had wakened me from sleep to tell this story,
I would with stern rebuke have banished her
back down the stairs. Your age has spared you that.”
But Eurycleia, faithful nurse, replied:
“I do not taunt you, my dear child. In truth
Odysseus is at home as I told you.
He is that stranger whom the suitors shamed.
Telemachus knew well that it was he,
but shrewdly did not tell his father’s plans
till he could make the strutting suitors pay.”
Penelope flew from her bed, transformed,
embraced the aged nurse, let fall a tear.
When she had found her voice, she told the nurse:
“Now come, dear nurse, and tell me honestly:
if he arrived back home as you have said,
how could he strike the shameless suitors down
alone? They always loiter in a throng.”
Her dear nurse Eurycleia answered her:
“I did not see, but what loud groans I heard,
from slaughter! Safe, in farthest palace reaches,
we sat afraid, our tight-fit door kept shut
until your son appeared to fetch me down.
Telemachus’ father sent the youth for me.
In corpses of the slain I found Odysseus,
standing amid where they were strewn about.
It would have warmed your heart to see your husband
spattered with blood and gore just like a lion.
But now the dead are by the courtyard gate,
in heaps, and he is scouring floors with sulphur,
purging with fire. He just sent me up here.
So come, let happiness enfold you two,
two hearts that have endured a host of trials.
What you have wished for most has come to pass!
He reached his hearth alive, and found his son
and you at home. The men who wronged him so,
the suitors, all he has repaid downstairs!”
But skeptical Penelope replied:
“My dear, do not deride and cruelly taunt.
You know that in these halls he would be welcome,
especially to the son I bore and me.
Yet that is not a truthful tale you tell.
Instead a god cut down the strutting suitors,
indignant at their wanton, wicked deeds.
They did not honor any mortal man
who came here, not the noble, not the base.
They paid for wickedness. Odysseus, though,
gave up returning here, and died himself.”
Sn protest, loyal Eurycleia said:
“My child, what sort of words flew past your teeth!
He sits downstairs, the husband you denied
would ever come! Your heart did not have faith!
Now hear of something unmistakable:
his scar, where once a boar’s white tusk slashed in.
I saw it, washing him, and wanted then
to tell. He clasped my mouth, though, with his hands,
and in his wisdom would not let me speak.
Now follow me, and I will stake my life:
if I deceive you, give me wretched death.”
Senelope responded, circumspect:
“Dear nurse, how hard it is to comprehend
the gods’ designs. They are complex indeed.
But let us join my son, so I can see
the men who wooed me slain, and him who slew.”
Shat said, she went downstairs, while in her heart
she pondered whether to stand apart and talk
or walk close, kiss his head and clasp his hands.
But when she stepped across the stone threshold,
she sat in firelight opposite Odysseus,
against the wall. Beside a lofty post
he waited—eyes downcast—for her to speak,
the worthy wife whose eyes could see him now.
A long time she sat silent, stupefied.
No matter how she scrutinized his face,
she did not know him in his base disguise.
Telemachus addressed her, finding fault:
“You are too shameful, Mother, hard of heart!
Why do you keep yourself aloof, instead
of sitting by him, talking, asking questions?
No other wife would be immovable
and slight a man who, having suffered trials
for twenty years, regained his fatherland.
In you there beats a stubborn heart of stone!”
Not yet convinced, Penelope replied:
“My child, this heart is truly wonderstruck.
I cannot question him, or speak to him,
or look him in the eye. But if in truth
he is Odysseus come back home, we both
will recognize each other well. We two
know telltale signs, concealed from all but us.”
At that, unshakable Odysseus smiled
and forthwith sent Telemachus swift words:
“Telemachus, leave us two here alone.
By testing, she will know me soon enough.
Since I am filthy, wearing wretched clothes,
she lacks respect, cannot say I am he.
But you and I must think of what comes now.
Whenever someone kills a single man—
even a man who leaves but few avengers—
the killer must take flight from land and kin.
Yet we have slain not one, but all the cream
of youths in Ithaca. Now think on that.”
Telemachus, his mind alert, shot back:
“Dear father, look to this yourself—the best
tactician of them all, they say, whom none
can outcompete at killing men in war,
and we will more than gladly follow you
with all our valor, our abilities.”
To that, astute Odysseus made response:
“All right, then, this is what seems wise to me.
First wash yourselves and put your tunics on.
Order the maids to don their finest dress.
Request the bard to take his clear-toned lyre
and strike up festive music for a dance,
sounding outside as would a marriage feast
to those who walk the street or live nearby.
The news should not be spread throughout the town
about the suitors, not till we have moved
out to our country orchards. After that,
we will take any counsel Zeus may give.”
He spoke; they listened and obeyed each word.
They washed themselves, they put their tunics on.
The women dressed. The minstrel took in hand
his hollow lyre, and roused in them a thirst
for pleasant song, for blissful, festive dance.
The palace soon resounded from the feet
of playful men and girls with shapely waists.
A person hearing from outside might say:
“One of the suitors has become her king.
Stubborn she was, but lost the heart to guard
Odysseus’ house in hopes of his return.”
They talked, but did not know where matters stood.
Meanwhile, inside divine Odysseus’ home,
Eurynome first washed, then oiled his skin,
and dressed him in a splendid cloak and tunic.
From head to toe Athena showered grace
that made him look more tall, more strong. His head
she hung with hair like hyacinths in bloom.
As gold is poured on silver by a man
to whom Hephaestus and Athena gave
the skills required for making beauteous things,
so she poured grace on him, his head and shoulders.
Appearing like a god, he left his bath
and sat upon his chair beside the post,
facing his wife. He spoke a word to her:
“My dear, most feminine of wives, in you
the Olympus-dwellers put an obdurate mind.
No other wife would have it in her heart
to slight a man who, having suffered trials
for twenty years, regained his fatherland.
So go, good maid, prepare a bed so I
can sleep alone. Her feelings are like iron.”
Penelope replied, not yet convinced:
“Sir, do not think me cold. I mean no slight,
but I remember well the way you looked
departing Ithaca with long-oared ships.
Now, Eurycleia, spread our sheltering bed
outside the room that he himself once built.
Go move the bedstead out, spread on the bedding—
blankets, a fleece and bright-hued coverlets.”
She said that as a test of him. Odysseus,
incensed, protested to his cautious wife:
“Woman, the words you spoke have cut me deeply!
Has someone moved my bed? That would be hard
for any man, although a god could come
and simply set it in another place.
No mortal, even one in youthful prime,
could budge it. No, there is a secret made
into that bed, which I alone once built.
An olive sprout took root inside the wall;
it flourished there, grew sturdy as a pillar.
Around the olive tree I built a room
with walls of close-laid stones. I roofed it well
and added doors of wooden planks joined tight.
I trimmed away the olive’s leafy boughs,
then shaped and smoothed its trunk from roots on up—
straight as a tight-stretched cord on every side—
and drilled the holes required to make a bedpost.
I anchored on that post a bed’s framework—
the parts inlaid with silver, ivory, gold—
and laced red oxhide straps across the frame.
No others know the secret I revealed.
Our bed is standing there today, unless
another man has cut the olive’s trunk.”
Shen she heard that, her heart and knees unlocked.
The secret knowledge proved he was Odysseus.
With streaming tears, she ran and threw her arms
around his neck. She kissed his head and begged:
“Odysseus, please do not be angry; you
must understand. We have been plagued by gods
who grudged that we should stay together past
youth’s vigor, on beyond old age’s threshold.
Do not be angry at me now, or blame me,
that when you first appeared I did not greet you.
Without surcease, my heart has had to stay
on guard against deceitful words of men,
many of whom beguile to gain advantage.
Just look at Zeus’s daughter, Argive Helen,
who fell prey to a foreign man’s seduction,
not knowing that the bold Achaean sons
would suffer loss on loss to fetch her home.
A goddess stimulated her transgression
but first infused her heart with foolish blindness,
disastrous origin of all our sorrows.
But when you just described the telltale cue,
our bed that no one else has ever seen,
just you and I and one of my handmaids—
Actor’s daughter, my father’s gift to me—
who watched the doors to our secure bedroom,
you turned my heart, unyielding though it was.”
Ser words aroused in him an urge to weep,
and weep he did, dear wife held in his arms.
As when a welcome shore appears to swimmers—
oarsmen whose sturdy seagoing ship Poseidon
shattered by power of wind, of mighty waves—
a few of whom escape to reach dry land
by swimming—bodies caked with hardened brine—
and gladly step on earth, eluding fate,
so was she gladdened as she eyed Odysseus.
She could not take her pale arms from his neck.
Dawn’s rosy fingers would have lit their tears
had gleaming-eyed Athena not observed them.
For hours she checked night’s passage. Dawn, likewise,
she kept by Ocean, would not let her yoke
her fleet-foot horses, who bring light to men,
Lampus and Phaethon, team that carry Dawn.
Meanwhile Odysseus told Penelope:
“Ah wife, we have not reached the end of trials,
not yet. There will be further massive toil
and hardship, woes that I must yet endure.
The seer Tiresias’ shade so prophesied
the day I journeyed down to Hades’ realm
to seek a way back home for me, my crew.
But let us go to bed now, wife, that soon
we may enjoy the pleasure sweet sleep gives.”
Penelope, grown curious, replied:
“There will be bed for you, as much as you
could want, now that the gods have brought you back
here to your fatherland, your well-built home,
but since you were inspired to bring it up,
do tell me of this trial. Eventually I
will learn, and none the worse to know right now.”
Responding to Penelope, he said:
“Strange lady, why are you exhorting me
to tell? All right, I will leave nothing out.
This will not please your heart, nor does it mine.
To countless mortals’ towns the prophet bade
me roam, a balanced oar held in my hands,
until I come to where men do not know
the sea, nor do they eat their food with salt,
nor do they know of ships with ruddy prows
or balanced oars—which are the wings of ships.
He told me of this sign, I will not hide:
another traveler will come up to me
and say a winnowing fan is what I hold.
He told me I should fix my oar in earth
and make fine sacrifice to lord Poseidon—
a ram, a bull, a lusty, fattened boar—
then hasten here and offer hecatombs
to all the deathless gods who hold the skies,
in proper turn. For me from seaward death
will come, the very gentlest kind, and claim me,
worn down by gradual age, among a folk
in plenty. All these things will be, he said.”
Thoughtfully, Penelope remarked:
“If gods are going to give you ripe old age,
there must be hope for passing through your trials.”
In such a way they talked between themselves.
Eurynome and Eurycleia put
soft covers on the bed by light of torches,
and after they had made the sturdy bed,
the old nurse went her way for welcome rest.
Bedchamber maid Eurynome walked with
them to their bed, a torch held in her hands.
She showed them to the room and left them there,
the place where their inviting bed yet stood.
Telemachus, also the livestock herders,
rested their dancing feet, restrained the women
and went to bed themselves in shadowy corners.
Now, when the two had savored blissful love,
they savored stories, each recounting tales:
she of the way her maids helped her bear up
while watching the consuming suitor hordes,
who on account of her devoured his cows,
his sheep, and drank up many a jar of wine.
Odysseus told about the grief he caused
his men, the miseries that he sustained.
He told the whole. She gaped. No blissful sleep
fell on her eyelids till he had told all.
He told her how he bested the Ciconians;
how then he came to lotus eaters’ land;
how Cyclops paid in blood for what he did,
for comrades whom he pitilessly ate;
how next Aeolus warmly hosted him
and sent him off—though fate would not yet bring
him home, for soon a tempest swept him far
across the fish-filled seas, groaning bleakly;
how Laestrygonians at Telepylus
destroyed his ships and killed his strong-greaved comrades,
except a single ship and crew who fled.
He told of scheming Circe, all her tricks,
and how he went to Hades’ moldy realm
to seek the Theban seer, Tiresias’ shade,
and while below saw dear departed friends,
his mother, too, who bore and nurtured him.
He told of how he heard the Sirens’ song,
and of the roving rocks and dread Charybdis,
paired up with Scylla, who leave none unscathed;
and how his men had slain the cows of Helios,
who had his ship destroyed—a lightning bolt
from thunderous Zeus that killed his valiant comrades—
every one—though he eluded doom;
and how he reached the nymph Calypso’s isle,
who wanted him to marry her, kept him
inside her caves, nurturing him, and vowed
to make him deathless, yes, forever young,
but never swayed the spirit in his chest;
and how through grinding toil he reached Phaeacians,
a folk who gave him honor like a god,
and brought him to his fatherland by ship,
giving him bounty—clothing, bronze and gold.
He spoke the final word, and balmy sleep
relaxed his limbs, released his heart from cares.
The goddess gleaming-eyed Athena watched,
and when she thought Odysseus had his fill
of nuptial pleasure in his bed, of sleep,
she promptly roused from Ocean gold-throned Dawn,
who brought her light to men. Odysseus rose
from bed and gave Penelope directions:
“Ah wife, we both have had our fill of trials.
Through all my countless troubles, you stayed here
and wept while Zeus and other gods harassed,
detained me, far from this, my fatherland.
Now we have reunited in our bed,
but in these halls is wealth for you to watch.
The cattle—which the strutting suitors stole—
I will replace with spoils. Achaean friends
will give until the sheepfold overflows.
But I will go now to my hillside orchards
and see my sire, awash with grief for me.
Here is my charge to you. You must realize
that with the sunrise, rumors will spread fast
about the suitors slaughtered in my hall.
Go to your chambers, take your servant maids.
Wait there. Let no one see or speak to you.”
With that, he put his burnished armor on.
He woke Telemachus, the loyal herdsmen,
and told the three to get their battle gear.
They followed his command and armed in bronze.
Out through the doors they went, Odysseus first.
Since light was on the earth by then, Athena
cloaked them in dark and led them through the town.


Book 24

Cyllenian Hermes called to account the shades
of those who once had wooed. He held his wand
of glittering gold, with which he stills men’s eyes
or, if he chooses, wakens them from sleep.
The suitors’ shadows followed, voices chirping.
As when in caverns’ darkest depths the bats
may flit and squeak when one bat falls away
from where they cling for mutual support,
so did the suitors’ shadows chirp as Hermes
drew them along their baleful, moldy path,
beyond the bright white rock at Ocean’s current,
past Helios’ gates, past shapes who people dreams,
until they reached the plain of Asphodel,
where spirits prowl, mere phantoms, once alive.
They found the shade of Peleus’ son Achilles,
blameless Patroclus, young Antilochus,
and Ajax, who in size and form surpassed
all Greeks except the noble son of Peleus.
They gathered round Achilles’ shade, and up
came that of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
grief-stricken, flanked by shadowy souls of those
who also perished in Aegisthus’ halls.
The shade of Peleus’ son proclaimed to him:
“Atrides, we believed that thunderous Zeus
always loved you above your fellow warriors
because you ruled the most and mightiest men
when Greeks were struggling in the land of Trojans.
But he had planned for you a premature
demise—though none can dodge eventual death.
You should have won the honor you deserved:
to meet your doom on Trojan battlefields.
Achaeans would have built a monument;
you would have won your sons eternal glory.
Instead, ignoble murder was your lot.”
To that, the shade of Atreus’ son replied:
“Achilles—like a god, blest son of Peleus—
you died in Troy, and round your body hordes
met death, Achaea’s bravest sons, and Troy’s,
competing for your corpse. Beneath dust clouds
you lay, your horsemanship a memory.
We fought the whole day through and never would
have ceased had Zeus not stopped us with a tempest.
We brought you off the field, boarded a ship,
settled you on a bier and cleaned your skin
with water—warmed—and ointment. Round the bier
Achaeans wept and tendered locks of hair.
Your mother left the sea—her Nereids followed—
on hearing of your death, and wails arose,
ungodly sounds that frightened every Greek.
Then would the men have boarded ships and sailed
had not a man of deepest wisdom checked them,
Nestor, whose previous counsels proved correct.
With kind intent, he told Achaea’s sons:
‘Do not take flight, Argives, Achaean youths!
His mother brought from depths her deathless Nereids,
all come to gaze upon her son, now dead.’
At that, the valiant Greeks abandoned flight.
Around you ancient Nereus’ daughters stood,
distraught. They dressed you in immortal raiment.
The Muses—all nine—interwove their voices,
singing a dirge, and not a single man
could hold his tears, so lovely was their song.
For seventeen full days, the nights as well,
we mourned, immortal gods and mortal men,
till on the eighteenth day we gave you fire,
slaughtering fattened sheep and bent-horned oxen.
You burned in heaven’s garb, in ample ointments,
in honey sweet. A multitude of warriors
circled the blazing fire in battle armor,
both foot and chariot fighters, shouting, roaring.
After Hephaestus’ flames were gone from you,
at dawn we packed your glistering bones, Achilles,
in unmixed wine and oils. Your mother gave
a golden urn, a gift from Dionysus,
so we were told, Hephaestus’ handiwork.
Your white bones lie in there, renowned Achilles,
with those Menoetius’ son Patroclus left.
Antilochus’ bones lie near, whom you esteemed
beyond your other comrades save Patroclus.
Above you three a giant monument
we heaped—we mighty force of Argive warriors—
out on a headland by the Hellespont,
visible even far at sea to men
who now exist and those to come hereafter.
Your mother asked the gods for matchless prizes
that she could set before assembled Greeks.
You have attended many a funeral game
upon a hero’s death, or yet a king’s,
where young men girded up and entered contests,
but you would still have been amazed to see
the dazzling prizes offered by your mother
as proof that you were deeply loved by gods.
Your name did not die out, no, evermore
your fame will dumbfound mortal men, Achilles.
What good was it for me to see war’s end?
On my return, Zeus planned a wretched death
beneath Aegisthus’ hand, his and my wife’s.”
In such a way the pair of shades talked on,
when near them came the Argus-slaying runner,
leading the souls of men Odysseus killed.
The two approached and marveled at the sight
till Agamemnon recognized a shade,
Melaneus’ son, far-famed Amphimedon,
who once had hosted him in Ithaca.
The son of Atreus’ shade addressed him now:
“Amphimedon, how came you here, to gloom,
you and these fellow youths—a group who are
the finest one could find within your town?
Perhaps Poseidon killed you on the sea,
arousing dreadful winds and monstrous waves.
Or did some mortal men kill you on land
as you were rustling cows or fleecy sheep,
or as you fought to take their town and women?
Do answer me, since I was once your guest.
You may recall when I stayed in your home
with Menelaus. We urged Odysseus, then,
to come with us to Ilium’s citadel.
Fully a month we sailed the sea to reach him,
and barely did we sway the man to join us.”
Shantom Amphimedon declared to him:
“Most glorious Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
how well do I recall what you described,
and I will tell you how we souls came here,
how gruesome death’s finality occurred.
For years we courted lost Odysseus’ wife,
but she would neither marry nor refuse.
Instead she chose to plot for us black fates,
concocted in her mind a shrewd deceit:
she worked a loom within her upper chamber,
wove cloth both large and fine, and said to us:
‘Young suitors, though Odysseus now is dead,
remarriage must wait till this work is finished,
else gone to waste will be my toil to weave
a shroud for when Laertes, old by now,
falls prostrate, yielding to his fate of death.
The women hereabouts would censure me
if he should lie unwrapped despite his wealth.’
“She told us that, and we believed it true.
In fact, by day she plied the massive loom,
but after dark she took her work apart.
For three long years her ruse deluded us,
but when the fourth year’s seasons came around—
so many days and months had dawned and died—
a servant maid who knew the truth revealed it.
We caught her in the act, undoing work,
and she was forced to finish up the shroud.
When she displayed the wrap she wove, complete
and washed, it dazzled like the sun or moon.
“Helped by a god, Odysseus came ashore
near outer country where his swineherd dwelt.
Next came divine Odysseus’ cherished son,
arrived aboard a ship from sandy Pylos.
The two of them, devising suitors’ deaths,
appeared in town. Odysseus, to be clear,
came last; Telemachus preceded him.
The swineherd led Odysseus, poorly clad,
resembling just a wretched beggar, old,
propped on a staff and wearing ragged clothes.
Not even older suitors recognized
the man who came to town in masquerade.
We hectored him with mocking words and missiles.
In his own halls, he stood it for a time—
the blows, the mockery—in steadfast silence
until the mind of Zeus awakened him,
following which his son and he removed
the arms from his great hall and locked the doors.
Meanwhile he bade his ever-loyal wife
set out his bow and twelve iron axes for us—
to test the suitors’ worth, to start our slaughter.
Not one of us could bend the mighty bow
to hook its string. We were not strong enough.
Before the bow could reach the beggar’s hands,
in unison we suitors shouted protest:
do not give him the bow, no matter what!
Telemachus, however, said to give it.
Divine, steadfast Odysseus took the weapon,
easily strung it, shot through all the irons.
He stood before the doors and notched an arrow.
Taking his aim, he shot Antinous.
Toward others, then, he sent his deadly shafts,
carefully trained. His targets fell in heaps.
A god was on his side, his and his cohorts’,
and soon they went rampaging through the hall,
slaughtering on all sides till groans waxed loud
from mighty blows, till blood pooled everywhere.
So that is how we fell, and even now
our bodies lie outside his halls, neglected.
Our loved ones stay at home still unaware,
those who would cleanse our wounds of blackened gore
and lay us out for mourning—slain men’s due.”
That moved the son of Atreus’ shade to say:
“Laertes’ lucky son, adroit Odysseus,
you have a wife with virtue never matched!
How steadfast was Penelope’s affection!
Icarius’ daughter only loved Odysseus,
the man she wed. Her fame will never die!
The gods will plant among those on the earth
a song to praise Penelope, devoted,
unlike Tyndareus’ daughter, who conspired
to kill her husband. Hateful songs of her
will spread to mortal men, and stain the name
of women, even those who do no wrong.”
Sn such a vein they spoke among themselves,
standing in Hades’ realm beneath the earth.
Meanwhile Odysseus’ party reached the tract,
well-tended by Laertes, who had once
acquired it as a spoil and since improved it.
A house was there, and round it stood the shacks
in which the servants ate and passed the nights,
the bondsmen who helped cultivate the land.
Within the house an old Sicilian woman
tended Laertes, gently, far from town.
Odysseus told his son and trusted servants:
“Go now, inside the well-constructed house,
slaughter the finest hog, prepare a meal,
but I will go and see my sire, determine
whether he has the sight and sense to know me,
or fails to recognize me, gone so long.”
That said, he handed aides his combat armor,
and they repaired inside the house, while he
moved swiftly through the groves to test his father.
He did not find farm overseer Dolius,
his six sons or his servant men. They were
collecting stones to build an orchard fence,
and aging Dolius supervised the work.
Odysseus found his father by himself,
weeding around a tree, his tunic soiled,
in need of patches. Round his lower legs
were oxhide gaiters, scuffed through years of use.
His hands wore gloves against the briars, his head
a goatskin cap that emphasized his woe.
When much-enduring, bold Odysseus saw him,
worn down by age, deep sorrow swept his heart.
He stood behind a tall pear tree and wept.
He searched his soul, deciding what to do:
should he embrace and kiss his father, tell
of how he finally reached his native land,
or should he first ask questions, test his sire?
Eventually he thought it would be best
to start by testing him with mockery.
With that in mind, Odysseus walked right up
to where his father dug around the roots.
The father’s glorious son declared to him:
“Old sir, you show no lack of skill at care
of plants! Indeed, none here is ill-attended—
no vine of grapes, no tree of olives, figs
or pears—and every garden bed is tilled.
But I must say—and do not take offense—
that you are not well cared for in old age.
You are unclean, you dress in wretched rags.
Your age and labors merit more respect.
In fact, you do not look to be a serf.
Your size and grace suggest nobility!
Your master ought to give you baths, good food,
a soft bedstead—which are the elders’ due.
Now answer this for me and tell the truth.
Who is your lord? Whose orchard do you tend?
And most important, tell me honestly
if this is Ithaca as someone said,
another man I met near here just now,
a hurried man who would not take the time
to speak to me or hear me when I asked
if by some chance a onetime guest still lives
or has met death and gone to Hades’ realm.
But let me tell my tale for you to hear.
Back in my fatherland I had a guest,
and never was another mortal man—
who came from far away—a better friend.
He claimed to be from Ithaca and said
his father was Arcesius’ son Laertes.
I took him in and entertained him well
out of the ample stores I kept at home.
I gave him gifts appropriate to our friendship.
I gave him well-wrought gold, full seven talents;
a mixing bowl embossed with silver flowers;
twelve mantles, fine; as many coverlets;
a dozen heavy cloaks with matching tunics.
I gave him women skilled at handiwork,
four beauties whom I let him choose himself.”
Odysseus’ father answered him through tears:
“Stranger, indeed you are in Ithaca,but wanton, 
arrogant men control this land.
Your gifts were wasted, those you just described.
If he were still alive in Ithaca,
he would have honored you with equal gifts,
and entertained you well, as was his custom.
But tell me something, tell me honestly,
how many years ago did you host him,
your hapless guest, my son? When he was born,
he was ill-starred. He perished far from home,
devoured by fish at sea, or on dry land
fell prey to animals or birds. His parents,
who gave him life, did not array his body,
nor did his steadfast wife, Penelope,
lament beside her husband’s bier when she
had closed his eyes—all honors due the dead.
Tell me the truth, in order that I know.
What men do you come from? What town? What parents?
Where did you moor the ship that brought you here,
or were you traveling as a passenger
aboard a ship of strangers bound elsewhere?”
In answer, shrewd Odysseus said to him:
“All right, I will describe those things to you.
I maintain stately halls in Alybas,
son of Apheidas, son of Polypemon.
I am Eperitus by name. A god
diverted me off course, bound for Sicania.
My ship is moored by fields outside of town.
As for Odysseus, five full years have passed
since he set out and left my fatherland,
unlucky soul. Yet birds had boded well
by flying east. So I was glad that day,
and he was cheered. He thought we two again
would meet in friendship, trade resplendent gifts.”
A somber cloud of grief engulfed Laertes.
He picked up ash and dust in mottled hands
and smeared his hoary head amid loud wails.
Odysseus’ heart was stirred; his nostrils stung,
anticipating tears, watching his father.
He bounded forward, kissed, embraced and said:
“Father, I am the man of whom you speak!
I came home after twenty years away!
But hold the weeping, hold your tears of joy,
while I explain our need for speedy action.
I killed the suitors who were in our halls,
took just revenge for their atrocious deeds.”
Laertes found his voice and answered him:
“Well, if my son Odysseus has returned,
tell me some secret sign that I can trust!”
Astute Odysseus answered him and said:
“First let your eyes behold this telltale scar,
the place a boar’s tusk slashed me, on Parnassus,
where you and honored Mother bade me go
to see Autolycus, her sire, and fetch
the bridal gifts he promised years before.
Now I will speak about our orchard’s stock,
which you gave me. I asked about each kind
when as a child I followed you among them.
You told their names, identified each tree.
Of pears you gave thirteen, of apples ten,
and forty figs. You named the rows of vines—
full fifty rows—and said to harvest each
as soon as it was filled with grapes in bunches—
whenever Zeus’s seasons weighed them down.”
At that, Laertes’ heart and knees relaxed
to hear what no man knew besides Odysseus.
He threw his arms around his son, who then
supported him because his breath was failing.
But after he revived, regained his senses,
he spoke again, declaring his response:
“By Zeus, there still are gods on high Olympus
if all the swaggering suitors paid their due!
But I am fearful that before much longer,
the Ithacans will come here, reinforced,
enlisting Cephallenians near and far.”
Sver-astute Odysseus answered that:
“Fear not! Do not let such things trouble you!
Let us return now to our country home.
Telemachus, the swineherd and the cowherd
are there, preparing food for us to eat.”
Shat said, the two set out toward the house,
and when they reached the roomy dwelling place,
the loyal herders with Telemachus
were carving roasted meat and mixing wine.
Meanwhile, elsewhere within Laertes’ rooms,
the old Sicilian bathed him, rubbed on oil
and wrapped a cloak around. Athena, then,
approached and amplified the aged monarch
till he looked larger, sturdier than before.
After the bath, his cherished son was stunned
to see his father looking like a god.
Amazed, Odysseus told his sire, Laertes:
“Father, one of the deathless gods above
made you appear to be more tall, more noble.”
Laertes, now alert, faced him and said:
“O father Zeus, Athena and Apollo,
if I were young, as when my Cephallenians
conquered the heights of mainland Nericus,
why, yesterday within our palace halls
I would have armed and stood by you to rout
the men who wooed. I would have loosed their knees—
many enough to make your heart exult!”
While son and father talked in such a way,
the preparations for a feast were finished,
and all took seats on either chairs or couches.
But as they reached to pick up food, in walked
the old man, Dolius, followed by his sons,
arrived from working fields. The old Sicilian
summoned them in. She was the young men’s mother,
also Laertes’ handmaid as he aged.
When Dolius and his sons descried Odysseus,
they stood stock-still, agape. Odysseus, though,
addressed the men with reassuring words:
“Sit down to dinner, sir, believe your eyes!
Although we have been keen to eat this food,
we waited in the halls for you to come.”
At that, old Dolius held his arms straight out.
He clasped Odysseus’ wrists, kissed both his hands,
managed to find his voice and spoke to him:
“Dear lord, you came as we devoutly hoped—
but hardly could believe! The gods have led you!
Hail and good health! May heaven grant you ease!
But tell me honestly, so I may know,
whether Penelope is now aware
of your return, or should we send her word.”
Sble Odysseus answered him and said:
“She knows, old sir, no need for you to worry.”
Old Dolius backed away and took a seat.
Like him, his sons came crowding round Odysseus,
greeted and welcomed him, embraced him warmly,
before each took a seat beside their father.
Meanwhile, as they were busy eating dinner,
Rumor was spreading news throughout the town
about the suitors’ deaths, their fates fulfilled.
Appalled, the people rose, dashed here, dashed there.
Before Odysseus’ halls they wailed, they groaned.
They brought the corpses out and buried them,
except the dead who came from foreign lands—
those they embarked aboard swift ships with oarsmen.
The townsmen gathered in assembly, grieving,
and after they collected, came together,
a man stood up and spoke a word, Eupeithes,
upon whose heart lay sadness for his son,
Antinous, the first Odysseus killed.
Amid his falling tears, Eupeithes said:
“Ah friends, Odysseus brought us only grief!
He led our bravest youths aboard his ships,
then wrecked the vessels, lost the crewmen’s lives.
Now he has killed the noblest Cephallenians.
So come, before he sails, escapes to Pylos,
or sacred Elis where Epeans rule,
let us pursue, or else be shamed forever!
Disgrace will be perceived by men unborn
if after sons’ and brothers’ deaths we fail
to take revenge. I would not be content
to live. I would prefer to join our dead.
So let us go before they slip away!”
His tearful words aroused his listeners’ pity,
but then came Medon, with the godlike bard—
waked from Odysseus’ halls where they had slept.
They stood amid the men still stunned with grief
until insightful Medon spoke a word:
“Hear what I say! Odysseus, Ithacans,
did not conspire against the will of heaven.
I saw the god who took a stand beside him,
a god in every way resembling Mentor.
I saw that god first standing by Odysseus,
heartening him, and later chasing wooers
about the hall where they fell dead in heaps.”
At that, a yellow dread seized every man.
Old warrior Halitherses spoke up next,
the only man who saw both past and future.
With good intentions, he addressed the crowd:
“Now listen, Ithacans, to what I say!
Your own misdeeds brought on what happened here!
You failed to heed Mentor’s advice and mine,
to curb the foolish conduct of your sons,
who were committing wanton, unjust deeds,
wasting the goods, dishonoring the wife
of one who they thought never would return.
Obey me now, before our course is set!
We should not go, else some of you will die!”
The Ithacans rose up and shouted, roared—
the greater number, although many sat,
convinced by Halitherses, but Eupeithes
won over most. Straightway they put on armor,
and after they were clad in gleaming bronze,
they massed again, outside the roomy town.
Eupeithes spoke to them—foolhardy words.
He said he would avenge his son, but he
would not return, no, he would meet his fate.
Athena asked the son of Cronus, Zeus:
“Our father, Cronus’ son, the highest god,
what plan now lies concealed within your mind?
Will you make still more war and dreadful strife,
or will there be—on both sides—amity?”
The cloud-amasser Zeus replied to her:
“Child, why do you inquire about such things?
Did you not lay the plan for what transpired:
Odysseus would return and make them pay?
Do what you want, but I say this seems right:
now that Odysseus took his just revenge,
let all the folk acknowledge him as king,
and let the recent deaths of sons and kin
be put behind. Let there be friendship now
as once there was. Let there be peace and plenty.”
His words inspired Athena’s timeless zeal,
and she raced bounding down Olympus’ slopes.
After his men fulfilled desire for food,
unshakable Odysseus said to them:
“Go check to see if enemies approach.”
At that command, a son of Dolius rose
and, standing by the doorway, saw the crowd.
He straightway told Odysseus urgently:
“They are at hand! Let us put on our armor!”
On hearing that, the men sprang up to arm—
Odysseus’ group of four and Dolius’ sons.
Laertes dressed in armor, even Dolius—
gray-headed both, but now constrained to fight.
After the men were clad in burnished bronze,
Odysseus led them out through opened doors.
Athena, Zeus’s daughter, joined their ranks,
her form and voice resembling those of Mentor.
Smiling, Odysseus recognized the goddess
and said to his dear son Telemachus:
“Telemachus, they will soon be in range,
the men they chose, their finest fighting men.
Uphold our patrimony, which has long
been one of valor never matched on earth!”
Alert Telemachus in turn replied:
“Father, you are about to see my heart,
which will not shame your lineage, as you say!”
Laertes, pleased to hear his grandson, said:
“The gods love me today! Delight is mine!
My son’s son will prove brave when battle flames!”
Bright-eyed Athena, standing near, declared:
“Arcesius’ son—my favorite comrade here—
first pray to father Zeus’s bright-eyed daughter,
then raise and cast your spear that trails a long shadow!”
That said, Athena swelled Laertes’ valor.
He voiced a prayer to mighty Zeus’s daughter,
brandished and threw his spear. It trailed a long shadow
and struck Eupeithes’ helmet’s bronze cheek guard,
which did not stop the point from speeding through.
Eupeithes fell, the armor round him clanged.
Odysseus led his son to foremost ranks,
thrusting with swords and spears sharp on both ends.
At that point they might well have slain them all,
except that aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter
shouted an order, stopped the fighting forces:
“Desist from dreadful battle, Ithacans,
and draw apart before more blood is spilled!”
Athena spoke, and dread gripped every man.
They heard the goddess’ voice, and weapons dropped
from terror-stricken hands, tumbled to earth.
Minded to live, the townsmen turned to go,
but not Odysseus, who released a war cry
and swooped as might an eagle, starting a dive.
The son of Cronus hurled a thunderbolt,
which hit the ground before Athena’s feet.
At that, the bright-eyed goddess told Odysseus:
“Laertes’ Zeus-descended son, Odysseus,
desist, refrain from war and war’s exaction,
else you will anger Zeus, the son of Cronus!”
Odysseus acquiesced in her command.
She forged a pact of future amity,
Athena, aegis-keeping Zeus’s daughter,
who had assumed the form and voice of Mentor.